Skip to main content

Texts

Video

Audio

Software

Images
My uploads
My loans
My favorites
My lists
My collections
My web archives
Account settings
Get help
Log out
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "A Ray Of Vishnu"
See other formats
Preface

Dedication

1 . Advent

2. Education

3. Invitation

4. In Puri

5. Nama-bhajana

6. Vaisnava and Brahmanas

7 . The Gaura Mantra

s

8. The Disappearance Pastimes of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura

s

and Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI

9 . Sannyasa

10 . Spiritual Organization: The Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha and
the Gaudlya Math

11 . The Four Sampradayas

12 . Daivl-varnasrama

13 . Scholars and Indologists

14 . Triumph of the Gaudlya Math

15 . The Message is Sent to the West

16 . 1933 to 1936

17 . The Final Days

18 . His Contributions Summarized

Appendix I

Appendix II

Appendix III

Appendix IV

Appendix V


Appendix VI


Append ix VII
Appendix VIII


"Kardama Muni desired to beget a child who would be a ray of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One should beget a child who can perform the duties
of Visnu, otherwise there is no need to produce children. There are two kinds
of children born of good fathers: one is educated in Krsna consciousness so
that he can be delivered from the clutches of maya in that very life, and the
other is a ray of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and teaches the world
the ultimate goal of life ... Kardama Muni begot such a child-Kapila, the
incarnation of the Personality of Godhead who enunciated the philosophy of
Sankhya ... In the same order as Kardama Muni, about one hundred years ago,
Thakura Bhaktivinoda also wanted to beget a child who could preach the
philosophy and teachings of Lord Caitanya to the fullest extent. By his
prayers to the Lord he had as his child Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI
Maharaja, who at the present moment is preaching the philosophy of Lord
Caitanya throughout the entire world through his bona fide disciples."

/

Srimad-Bhagavatam 3.22.19 Purport


ALL GLORIES TO SRI GURU AND GAURANGA
LIVES OF THE VAISNAVA AcARYAS VOL. I


A Ray of Vishnu

The Biography of a Saktyavesa Avatara:

Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI Maharaja

Prabhupada

RUPA VILASA DASA
(Robert D. MacNaughton)


2


Preface


nama om visnu-padaya krsna presthaya bhu-tale
srimate bhaktivedanta- svamin iti namine

I offer my respectful obeisances unto His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, who is very dear to Lord Krsna,
having taken shelter at His lotus feet.

namas te sarasvate deve gaura-vanl-pracarine
nirvisesa-sunyavadi-pascatya-desa-tarine

Our respectful obeisances are unto you, O spiritual master, servant of
Sarasvatl Gosvaml. You are kindly preaching the message of Lord
Caitanyadeva and delivering the Western countries, which are filled
with impersonalism and voidism.

sri guru-vandana kori
tanhara carana dhori
srlbhaktisiddhanta prabhupada

ara yata siksaguru
sabe vanccha-kodpa-taru
krpa kara ghucuka visada

/

I offer obeisances unto my spiritual master, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Prabhupada and take hold of his lotus feet. And, unto my
various siksa gurus who are all like desire trees, I pray, "Please be
merciful, and remove all my sorrows."

[Mangalacarana of Srlla Prabhupada's Gltara-gana, verse 1]

This volume, which is a brief biography of Om Visnupada Sri Srlmad
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Gosvaml Prabhupada, is meant to be a

humble offering at his lotus feet through the agency of my spiritual

/ /

master, Om Visnupada Sri Srlmad A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


3




Prabhupada. I hope he will be pleased that I am attempting to glorify the
amazing activities and words of his spiritual master, which I have been
relishing very much over the past few months now. I am feeling much
closer to my spiritual grand-father and much enlivened by his
association and instruction.

Sometimes devotees claim that to attempt to relish the writings of other

acaryas is offensive and constitutes "jumping over". Historically, Srlla

Prabhupada was at times known to discourage some of his disciples from

reading Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's books and emphasized

that they should read his (Srlla Prabhupada's) books.

The point, of course, is that one must always first worship and honor his

acarya, his link with the sampradaya, and fully familiarize himself with

the teachings of his spiritual master. However, it is not eternally

forbidden to enter into the writings of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl

Thakura, as we know that Srlla Prabhupada permitted us to read his

commentary on the Brahma-samhita and in one letter to Hayagrlva,

dated November 16, 1969, he commented, "Articles written by my Guru

Maharaja can be published without any hesitation ..."

In 1972, in a Nectar of Devotion class in Vrndavana, Srlla Prabhupada

commented, "But in this life if we develop Krsna consciousness by

association with devotees, as Narottama dasa Thakura says, 'One's aim of

life should be to serve the acaryas: acaryopasanam.'

"So our acarya in the Gaudlya Vaisnava sampradaya is Sri Rupa,

/

Sanatana, Bhatta Raghunatha, Sri Jlva, Gopala Bhatta, Dasa
Raghunatha-the Six Gosvamls. And if we associate with them-this book
Nectar of Devotion, Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, if you read regularly, try to
understand-this means you are associating with Srlla Rupa GosvamI
directly. And if you act accordingly you are serving their lotus feet.
Tandera carana-sebi-bhakta-sane bas. [NOD-pgs. xii, xiii]

After all, who are those siksa-gurus who Prabhupada calls desire trees,
whose mercy he invokes at the beginning of this essay to "remove all of
my sorrows"? Are they not the spiritual masters in our line, the

commentators of the Srimad-Bhagavatam and other Gaudlya literatures?

/

When Srlla Prabhupada dedicates the Bhagavad-gita As It Is he writes,
"To Srlla Baladeva Vidyabhusana who presented so nicely the Govinda-


4



bhasya commentary on Vedanta philosophy." Is this jumping over?
Certainly not. He dedicates the Nectar of Devotion, "To the Six
Gosvamls of Vrndavana." And if we read the Brahma- samhita (which
was certainly authorized by Srlla Prabhupada) we are directly worshiping
Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura by our intelligence. As Lord
Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita:

adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvadam avayoh
jnana-yajhena tenaham
istah syam iti me matih

"And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation of ours
worships Me by his intelligence." [Bg. 18.70]

Tenaham istah syam: by him I shall be worshipped. If we accept it that
the vani of Krsna and the liberated associates of Krsna is non-different
than their persons, then they may be directly, personally worshipped by
the intelligence of the devotee. Who can deny it? The acaryas in our
line are all in the position of worshipable siksa-gurus for us. That is a
fact. Once a child takes birth, or a disciple takes diksa, he automatically
has direct, affectionate dealings with other family members. This is
especially true in spiritual relationships which are transcendental and
may be carried on with either the vapu or vani forms of those
personalities, unlike material relationships which are limited in so many
ways.

Furthermore, if it is jumping over to read the books of previous acaryas,

s

then what will we make of such statements in Srlla Prabhupada's books
as these:

Sri Sanatana Gosvam! Prabhu. teacher of the science of devotional service,
wrote several books, of which the Brhad-bhagavatamrta is very famous;
anyone who wants to know about the subject matter of devotees, devotional
service and Krsna must read this book [CC Adi, Ch. 5, p.498]

"The four Vedas with their supplementary Puranas, the Mahabharata, the
Ramayana and their corollaries which are known as smrtis are all authorized
sources of knowledge. If we are at all to gather knowledge, we must gather it
from these without hesitation." [CC Adi, Ch. 5. text 14]


5



"False devotees think that studying books of the previous acaryas is
unadvisable, like studying dry. empiric philosophies ..." [CC. Adi, Ch. 2. text
117]

"There are so many Vedic literatures, including Vedanta-sutra, the
Upanisads, Bhagavad-glta, Mahabharata and the Ramayana. One should take
lessons from these Vedic literatures and learn how to practice nivrtti-marga."

[SB 7.15.41]

It is certainly a principle in our Gaudlya Vaisnava philosophy that the
writings of previous acaryas must be studied and those acaryas must be
worshipped. It isn't jumping over to do so.

Jumping over implies disrespect or disregard of the spiritual master. For

/

example, Vallabha Bhatta thought the commentary of Srldhara Swami
inferior to his own and wanted to criticize Srldhara Swami, saying, "I
have refuted the explanation of Srldhara Swami. I cannot accept his
explanation ... he is inconsistent in his explanation and cannot be
accepted as an authority." Lord Caitanya smilingly replied, "One who
does not accept the Swami (husband) as an authority, I consider a
prostitute." This is jumping over-disrespecting the conclusions of the
previous acarya and going to the predecessor acaryas.

We have seen some of this in our movement, as in the case of one
Sanskrit scholar defying Prabhupada's orders and thinking he was more
advanced, going to Radha-kunda for "higher association" with other
sadhus, changing the dlaka, criticizing Srlla Prabhupada's chanting of
Gayatrl, etc.

Each guru in our sampradaya is a unique personality (guru is one and
different), who can be personally approached and worshipped.
Naturally, this worship begins with our spiritual master, his form, his
order, his books, etc. Acaryopasanam-one's aim of life should be to serve
the acaryas.

In any case, where do we find the essential teachings and intructions of

/

Srlla Prabhupada? In his books. So far as I know there is not a single
statement suggesting that we cannot worship Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura or any of the members of our disciplic succession. So
far as reading the books of the acaryas, if we go by Srlla Prabhupada's
purports, this is also suggested.


6



No one is denying that Srila Prabhupada at times discouraged certain
disciples from this practice. However, it seems clear that it had to do
with particular situations or crises, either personal or societal, in which a
disciple or disciples misunderstood Srila Prabhupada's position, or when
a disruption of our Movement was being fomented by persons inimical
to Srila Prabhupada. Those instructions were not meant to be held as
eternal principles. Worshiping the acaryas and studying their literatures
is an established principle of our philosophy, which is clearly espoused in
Srila Prabhupada's books. We must follow them. We have to understand
particular instructions in the light of the overall siddhanta.

An illustrative case in point: the Radha-kunda controversy. In 1976,

Srila Prabhupada was questioned about bathing in Radha-kunda-was it
all right? He gave assent and guidelines how it must be done: with
utmost reverence and respect. Devotees went and a number of them
began to sport, splash and behave frivolously. Srila Prabhupada found
out, became furious and banned bathing in Radha-kunda. However,

Srila Prabhupada's purports from Sri Upadesamrta and the acaryas '
commentary clearly enjoin us to take bath there. What is to be done?
Srila Prabhupada gave permission according to time, place and
circumstance and withdrew it likewise. The injunction, however, to
bathe in Radha-kunda is set down in scripture in a permanent form,
including Prabhupada's purport. We can understand Prabhupada's anger
had to do with the neophyte attitude of enjoying spirit, offensive to
Srlmatl RadharanI and not to the spiritual principle of bathing in
Radha-kunda. The conclusion is that we should adopt the serious,
mature, reverential mood desired by the acaryas and take bath there for
our eternal, spiritual benefit.

We must therefore worship the acaryas, and study their writings as far as
we are able to do so. Naturally such worship begins with our spiritual
master.

This book is an attempt to worship Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura. It is certainly flawed and incomplete in many ways, but
certainly the subject matter is not, and therefore it has value. Such
histories have value. By hearing of our spiritual lineage, we feel love,
pride and inspiration. We feel inspired to know what we are a part of.
We feel inspired by their pure examples, their exalted and purifying


7



words, their deep realizations. We begin to feel transcendental pride in
our spiritual ancestry-we realize that we are connected in parampara to
the greatest personalities in the universe-the most renounced, most
intelligent, most humble, most pure, most ecstatic personalities in the
universe. We can have a relationship with them. They are heaving us
upward. They are actively giving us association. They constitute the real,
eternal, living family of the spiritual world.


Dedication


To His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, my
eternal spiritual master, who delivered the merciful teachings of the
Vaisnava Acaryas to the suffering world. I pray that he may be a little
pleased with this attempt to glorify Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
GosvamI Maharaja Prabhupada.

nama orh visnu-padaya krsna presthaya bhu-tale
srimate bhaktisiddhanta-sarasvatlti namine

I offer my respectful obeisances unto His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl, who is very dear to Lord Krsna, having taken shelter at His
lotus feet.


sn-varsabhanavl-devi-dayitaya krpabdaye
krsna-sambandha-vijndna-dayine prabhave namah

s

I offer my respectful obeisances to Sri Varsabhanavl-devl-dayita dasa

✓ __

(another name of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura), who is

s

favored by Srlmatl RadharanI and who is the ocean of transcendental
mercy and the deliverer of the science of Krsna.

mddhuryojjvala-premddhya-sri-rupdnuga-bhaktida-
srl-gaura-karund-sakti-vigrahaya namo 'stu te

I offer my respectful obeisances unto you, the personified energy of Sr!
Caitanya's mercy, who deliver devotional service which is enriched with


8




conjugal love of Radha and Krsna, coming exactly in the line of
revelation of Srlla Rupa Gosvaml.

namas te gaura-vanl-srl-murtaye dina-tarine
rupanuga-viruddhapasiddhanta-dhyanta-hdrine

I offer my respectful obeisances unto you, who are the personified
teachings of Lord Caitanya. You are the deliverer of the fallen souls.
You do not tolerate any statement which is against the teachings of

s

devotional service enunciated by Srlla Rupa Gosvaml.


Advent


On the fifth day of the dark lunar fortnight of the month of Govinda

[corresponding to February 6th, 1874 A.D. by the western calendar], at

/

3:30 in the afternoon, Bimala Prasad Datta, later to be known as Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, made his appearance in
Purusottama Ksetra [Jagannatha Purl] in the state of Orissa, not far from

the temple of Lord Jagannatha. He was the fourth son of Srlla

/

Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Srlyukta Bhagavati Devi, and at the time of
his birth all thirty-two bodily symptoms of a maha-purusa, a great
personality, were pointed out by an experienced astrologer.

Furthermore, the boy was born with his umbilical cord wrapped around
his neck like a Brahmin's thread. The astrologer commented at his birth,
"I have done many horoscopes in my life, but I have never before seen
such a horoscope filled with all the signs of a great personality. This
child will become world famous as a brilliant teacher of life's ultimate
goal."

When the child was six months old, Lord Jagannatha's Rathayatra

/

Festival was in procession, and the cart stopped in front of Srlla

Bhaktivinoda Thakura's house for three days. Following the instructions
/

of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, Bhagavati Devi brought the child before
the cart and an offered garland fell from the neck of the Lord, encircling
the boy. This was taken as a sign of special favor by all present. The


9




grain ceremony was observed on the cart at this time and was done with
Jagannatha prasada. When the boy's vocational inclination was tested,
he immediately embraced the Srimad-Bhagavatam, indicating his future
as a preacher. Therefore, from the very beginning of his appearance,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura exhibited all the signs of an
exalted, eternal associate of the Lord, who had descended in answer to
Srila Bhaktivinoda's prayer for a "ray of Visnu" to help him spread the
Krsna Consciousness Movement.

Although family lineage may be ultimately irrelevant when considering
the appearance of an eternally liberated associate of the Lord, still it is
interesting to see what sort of family is blessed with such a
transcendental personality. As history shows us, Lord Brahma himself
appeared in the family of Muslims as Srila Haridasa Thakura, and there

are other instances of exalted persons taking birth in humble families.

/

Still, as a point of interest, we may hear something of the lineage of Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura.

His family line traces back to Lord Brahma from the descendants of
Chitragupta, and they are known as the Brahma kayasthas. Bharata is in
the 87th generation from Chitragupta, Bharadvaja is the 88th. After
him came Angira, and after him appeared Brhaspati. In the 149th
generation of descendants, Purusottama, son of Sivadatta, went to
Bengal upon the summons of the King of Bengal, Adisura. Purusottama's
youngest son took sannydsa and became famous as Kanaka Dandi. In the
7th and 8th generations of Purusottama's family Binayaka and his son
Narayana Datta both did ministerial work for the king of Bengal. In the
15th generation from Purusottama, Raja Krsnananda, the king of
Kheturi (in Bengal), and the father of Srila Narottama dasa Thakura,
the great Vaisnava dcarya, appeared. Raja Krsnananda was also a great
devotee and was personally favored by Lord Nityananda Prabhu. The
7th generation from Raja Krsnananda saw the appearance of
Madanamohana Datta, who was very famous in Bengal and Calcutta for
his spiritual qualities. His great-grandson was Anandachandra Datta,
and his son was Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, whose 4th son was Bimala
Prasad. The name Bimala or Shri Bimala Devi refers to the para sakti
(internal potency) of Lord Jagannatha, so his name literally means the
mercy of the internal potency of the Lord.


10



Bimala Prasad stayed in Jagannatha Purl for ten months after his
appearance and then journeyed to Bengal by palanquin on his mother's
lap. He grew up in his early years in Ranaghata in the District of Nadia,
hearing about Krsna from his mother.

/

When he was a small boy, perhaps two or three years old, Srlla

Bhaktivinoda Thakura brought some ripe mangoes from the market.

/

Bimala Prasad took one to eat, saying, "This is mine." Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura got up and said in a grave voice, "What is this? New fruit has
come into the house. It has not been offered to Giridharl and you have
taken it first? Remember, new fruit is to be given first to the Lord.
Without giving the first share to the Lord, nothing is to be taken."

The child was very repentant and exclaimed, "Oh, what evil thoughts I
have had! Throughout my whole life I shall not eat these again. This is
the right punishment for one ruled by greed." He made the promise and
observed it throughout his whole life. His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada comments on this incident:
"Whenever we offered him mango he said, 'No, I am an offender. I
cannot take mango.' He was thinking that I have offended [Krsna] in my
childhood by taking the mango of the Deity. So this is the characteristic
of the acarya. They teach by their life's action-one should be so much
determined. A child took the mango, there is no offense, but he took
that vow."


Education


When Bimala Prasad was seven years old, Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura
was constructing the Bhakti Bhavan in Calcutta at Ramabagana. During

s

that construction, a Deity of Lord Kurma was unearthed. Srlla
Bhaktivinoda Thakura ordered his son to begin regulated worship of
that Deity.

From the very beginning the boy used to hear the preaching of his father
with rapt attention. Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, as well as his audience,
were amazed to see how a small boy could hear the topics of Krsna


11




consciousness with such total absorption. By the age of seven he had
committed the entire Bhagavad-gita to memory and could wonderfully
explain the verses as well. Later on he was trained in publishing and
proof-reading at Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura's printing press in
connection with the Thakura's well-known spiritual journal the Sajjana-
Tosani. At the age of eleven, Bimala Prasad toured the various places of

s

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's lilas with his father.

Bimala Prasad had an eidetic memory. Whatever he would read once he

could later recall with perfect clarity. He was trained in mathematics

/

and astrology at the Sri Ramapura School, and he achieved such
astounding scholarship that he was eventually awarded the title
Siddhanta Sarasvatl by his tutors, Pandit Mahesh Chandra Chauramani
and Pandit Sundar Lai.

During this period he used to attend the Sunday weekly meetings of

Thakura Bhaktivinoda's Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha and hear the

/

Thakura lecture on the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu of Srlla Rupa Gosvaml.
He was never known to study his school assignments, and while sitting
at home, would replace those assignments with studies of Srlla
Narottama dasa Thakura's Prarthana, Premabhakti-candrika and other
devotional literatures. However, whatever questions he was asked by his
teachers, he would immediately answer, and he got excellent results on
all of his examinations.

He used to debate everyone he met on all sorts of subjects. No one who
argued with him was ever able to defeat him. Just as Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had defeated a great scholar, Kesava Kasmlrl at a young
age, so similarly Bimala Prasad once, during his later college days,
debated a scholar named Panchanana Sahityacharya, the disciple of
Vasudeva Sastri, a very famous professor of that time on topics of
astrological calculation. The debate was held in the home of Sri
Rajendra Chandra Sastri and judged by him as well. After some
discussion that scholar had to accept defeat. In fact, the scholar became
so mortified that he could not check the calls of nature. After that,
everyone was reluctant to debate him for fear of being defeated.

At the age of eleven, while in the fifth class, Bimala Prasad invented a
type of short-hand writing called Bicanto, and it was during this period
that he took a tour of the holy places with his father.


12



When the boy was in 7th class (equivalent to today's eighth class), and
about 13 years old, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura brought tulasl beads for
his son from Jagannatha Purl and gave him the name of Hari and a
Nrsimha mantra to chant which he executed very faithfully, along with
the worship of his Kurma Deity, according to the instructions of Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

At the age of sixteen, while his schooling continued, the books of Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura formed the serious content of his studies. He also
began writing books on astrology, and during this time he formed the
Cirakumara Sabha or the August Assembly amongst his friends with
whom he met regularly at Calcutta's Beadon Square. There they used to
discuss topics related to religion, and the members were required to take
a vow of celibacy. The Society was formed with the purpose of giving
people a chance to remain seriously engaged in worship of the Lord and
detached from family life. But Bimala Prasad was the only one who
observed his vows immaculately.

In 1892, at the age of eighteen, he took an entrance examination and
entered Calcutta's Sanskrit College. As before, he paid scant attention
to the prescribed books, but he found the time to read all of the
philosophical books contained in the library.

During his college holidays he would discuss the Vedas with the scholar
Sriyukta Prithvidhara Sharma. Although Siddhanta Sarasvatl had
become learned in all six branches of Vedic knowledge: siksa
(pronunciation), kalpa (sequences of Vedic sacrifice), vyaharana
(grammar, especially the use of word roots, inflected words and
sentences), nirukta (meanings of inflected words and word roots),
chandah (recitation of Vedic mantras) and jyotisa (astrological and
astronomical calculation), still to study the vyaharana, the grammatical
branch of the Vedas, he approached the Pandit Prithvidhara Sharma.
The Pandit praised him for his achievements and encouraged him to
study the Siddhanta Kaumudi throughout his life. Siddhanta Sarasvatl
replied, "My life is for the single-minded cultivation of the teachings of
Sri Caitanya, not for the cultivation of grammar. I have only studied the
Vedas, the branches of the Vedas and their related parts in a secondary
manner."

In 1895 he left the college, as he was very eager to execute his worship of


13



the Lord and to remain free from the pressure to enter family life. He
stated in his autobiography:

"If I remain studying with careful attention at the College, then extreme
pressure will be brought upon me to enter family life, but if I am considered to
be foolish and inefficient, then no one will put such an inducement upon me
for becoming so engaged. By this consideration, I left the Sanskrit College,
and, in order to maintain my life for the service of Hari, I was desirous of
getting an honest occupation which I could perform with the intention of
earning a humble income."

During his student days he also wrote essays on spiritual topics for
various magazines and strongly condemned various religious
malpractices which had become prominent in society. At the Bhakti
Bhavan in 1897 he established a catuspathi (a small academy) called
Saraswati Chatuspati where many learned persons from Calcutta
attended his lectures and discourses on astronomy. He also published the
magazines Jyotirvid and Brihaspati and other old astrological texts like
the Surya-siddhanta, a famous and highly regarded Sanskrit astronomical
treatise. Here he also established and edited the Bhakti Panjika, an
almanac. He was well-acquainted with both the Eastern and Western
branches of astrology, but naturally favored the Vedic one. He was
offered a chair in astronomy at the University of Calcutta by Sir
Asutosh Mukherjee, but Siddhanta Sarasvatl declined it, thinking it an
impediment to his spiritual life. At the request of Srila Jagannatha dasa
BabajI he composed the Sri Navadvipa Panjika, a Krsna-ized almanac in
which the months, lunar fortnights, days, lunar days, stars, etc. were all
given names of Visnu. He did not spend very long in his astronomical
pursuits, however, and soon dedicated himself fully to the worship and
distribution of the teachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

He was also employed by the royal kings of Tripura from 1895 to 1905 in
various services. Initially he accepted the post of editor, under
Panchasrika Maharaja Virachandra Manikya Bahadur, and he edited a
history of their family entitled Raj Ratnakar. During this time he studied
all of the principal books in the Royal Library. A year later, however,
the Maharaja departed from this world. The succeeding king, Maharaja
Radhakisore Manikya Bahadur entrusted Siddhanta Sarasvatl with the
instruction of the sons of the king in Bengali and Sanskrit. The king also


14



requested him to put an end to various cheating activities of persons
who were misappropriating royal wealth. Siddhanta Sarasvatl quickly
stopped this nonsense much to the delight of the king. He assisted the
royal family in different ways until 1905. At that time he requested to be
given leave, and this was granted along with a full pension, which he
accepted for some time and then later discarded.

During this ten year period many other significant events took place as

well. In 1897 he began to strictly observe the vows of Caturmasya ,

including the practice of cooking for himself one preparation daily,

taking the food from the ground and lying on the earth without any

bedding or pillow. In 1898 he toured Benares, Prayaga, and Gaya with
✓ - __

Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura and discussed philosophy with persons in

s

the line of Sri Ramanujacarya. In 1899, Siddhanta Sarasvatl published a
number of articles on spiritual topics in the magazine called Nivedana , a
Calcutta weekly.


Initiation


Siddhanta Sarasvatl had been engaged in regularly chanting the maha-

/

mantra and a Nrsimha mantra given to him by Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura when he was in the Seventh Class, and he had been worshiping
the Kurma Deity (discovered in laying the foundation of the Bhakti
Bhavan in Calcutta) since the age of seven. Without fail, he had been
executing that worship and chanting since his boyhood, and from 1885
onward he had received special training in printing, editing, etc. at the
press at the Bhakti Bhavan.

Thus, the young man was a very qualified candidate for becoming the
disciple of a guru. Many pseudo-gurus (mantra-peddlers) of the sahajiya
category wanted to have him as their disciple to increase their false
prestige. After all, Siddhanta Sarasvatl was a magistrate's son, he was a
strict renunciate from birth, he was learned and deeply attached to the
scriptures. But Siddhanta Sarasvatl was not interested in such
pretenders.


15




In 1898, after Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura had constructed his residence
in Navadvlpa Dhama at Godruma Dvlpa and called it Svananda-
sukhada-kunja, and sometime after the discovery of Lord Caitanya's
birth site by the Thakura and Srlla Jagannatha dasa BabajI, Srlla Gaura
Kisora dasa BabajI Maharaja arrived in Navadvlpa Dhama to see the site
of Sr! Caitanya Mahaprabhu's birth and to hear the discourses of Srlla
Bhaktivinoda Thakura. When he arrived, he was singing in ecstasy. His
only possessions were the tulasl mala which he wore around his neck and
another set he kept in his hand for counting. He kept a few books, such
as Narottama dasa Thakura's works: Prarthana and Prema-bhakti-
candrika.

Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI had been performing bhajana for many years in
Vrndavana. He was extremely renounced and was the disciple of
Bhagavata dasa BabajI, the disciple of Jagannatha dasa BabajI. He was
not well-educated and had been a grain-merchant in his previous
existence, but it was widely known that he was a liberated paramahamsa
of the highest caliber in the area of Vraja-mandala.

At the time of his arrival, he was wearing a cap made of tiger skin and
was carrying a basket of various items and materials for his service. He
spotted Siddhanta Sarasvatl and offered him four or five pieces of
knotted rope for chanting rounds, a tilaka stamp with the initials for
Hare Krsna, the tiger skin cap and paraphernalia for worship. Gaura
Kisora dasa BabajI Maharaja had received the basket and cap from his
spiritual master, Bhagavata dasa BabajI. Siddhanta Sarasvatl was very
attracted to Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl's lotus feet at first sight. He was
later to comment with great humility:

"I have been busy within this material world trying to bring sense
gratification within the grasp of my hand. I have often thought that by
obtaining the objects of sense gratification, all my short-comings will be
fulfilled. I often attained different facets that were indeed very rare, but my
own personal short-comings were never mitigated. In this material world I
have had the association of very high-class, aristocratic persons. However,
seeing their various deficiencies, I could not offer them praise. The most
merciful Supreme Lord Sri Gaurasundara, seeing me in such a lamentable
condition at such a time of adversity, gave permission to His two dearmost
devotees Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI to
grant their blessings to me. Because I was always intoxicated with a worldly


16



false ego, wanting again and again self-appraisal, I deprived myself of my own
real benefit. But because of the influence of my previous births' activities in
devotional service, I came into the association of Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, who was the form of my spiritual well-wisher. My spiritual master
[Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl] would go and visit Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, and many times would reside with him. Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, out of his compassion for other living entities, pointed out my
spiritual master, Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl. Upon seeing my spiritual
master, the extent of my worldly false ego diminished. I knew that all the
other living entities who have taken the human form of life were also fallen
and low like myself. But by gradually observing the spiritual character of my
master, I realized that only a Vaisnava could reside in this material world and
be of exemplary character."

At Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura's urging, the young man approached
Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl for initiation in the month of Magh of
the year 1900. Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl expressed reluctance to
accept him, knowing Siddhanta Sarasvatl to be a great scholar. Finally,
when Siddhanta Sarasvatl pleaded with him for initiation, Gaura Kisora
dasa Babajl replied, "Mahaprabhu will be asked. If He gives permission,
your desire will be fulfilled." On another day Siddhanta Sarasvatl
approached him again and asked, "What was Mahaprabhu's order?"

Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl replied, "I forgot to ask." The third time Babajl
Maharaja was requested, he replied, "I asked. I did not receive the
command of Mahaprabhu." Siddhanta Sarasvatl then stood up, his heart
breaking, and said, "You [Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Srlla Gaura
Kisora] are both worshippers of Krsna, the Crest Jewel of Debauchees,
therefore why will you take mercy on someone dedicated to ordinary
morality like me? In His pastimes as the exemplary teacher, Mahaprabhu
has given instructions on the worship of Krsna, the Crest Jewel of
Debauchees. Therefore, why will He give the command to take mercy on
me? But, karuna na haile kandiya kandiya prana na rakhibe ara - If there is
no mercy, weeping and weeping, I can sustain my life no more. If I do
not receive your mercy I do not see any need in holding onto life."

After thus indicating his readiness to take his life, Siddhanta Sarasvatl
began to cry. Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl's heart was melted to see
this, so he told him to take bath in the Sarasvatl and then come back to
him. At the time of initiation, he gave Siddhanta Sarasvatl the name:


17



s

Sri Varsabhanavl-devl-dayita dasa.

This pastime bears a striking resemblance to the relationship between
Narottama dasa Thakura and Lokanatha GosvamI-[Lokanatha GosvamI
was also an extremely humble and renounced paramaharinsa who was
reluctant to take any disciples, considering himself unqualified, but
finally accepted Narottama dasa Thakura as his only disciple.] It shows
how eager and determined one must be for the mercy of a pure devotee
of Krsna.


In Puri


In 1898 Siddhanta Sarasvatl had accompanied his father to KasI, Prayaga
and Gaya and had gathered many facts about all these holy places, which
were later incorporated into his commentary on the C aitanya-caritdmrta
called A nubhasya. In 1900 he published a book called Bange Samajikata,
which described the origin, location and philosophy of various societies,
castes and religions, and he expounded the clear superiority of Lord
Caitanya's doctrine of inconceivable, simultaneous oneness and
difference. In March he accompanied Bhaktivinoda Thakura to Orissa
where they visited the temple of Kslra-cora-goplnatha at Remuna, and
also saw Bhubaneswar and Purl. While in Purl, Srlla Bhaktivinoda

Thakura decided to build a place for bhajana just near the samadhi of

/

Srlla Haridasa Thakura, and so Siddhanta Sarasvatl stayed and served
his father in various ways, assisting him in establishing his Bhakti Kuti
by the sea.

At that time the Maharaja of Kaslmbazar was camped nearby, and he

/

came regularly to hear from Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Siddhanta
Sarasvatl. Siddhanta Sarasvatl was giving regular classes from the
Caitanya-caritdmrta in the presence of his father, and many listeners
were assembling just to hear it. The famous Radharamanacarana Dasa
BabajI used to come at that time to hear the discourses.

Later relations with the BabajI were broken because of two deviations by
him:


18




1. He introduced the chanting of Bhaja Nitai Gaura Radhe Syama
Japa Hare Krsna Hare Rama. This was introduced with the idea of
stopping the audible chanting of the maha-mantra. The first
problem with this was that the concocted mantra had the faults of
siddhanta-virodha- an opposing conclusion and rasabhasa-
conflicting rasas. The second problem was that trying to suppress
the audible vibration of the maha-mantra was against the desire of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as established by His activities and
teaching, as well as by the teachings of the Gosvamrs. Rupa

GosvamI had written in the Prathama Caitanyastaka, text five:

/

hare krsnty ucchaih-" Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chants the Hare
Krsna mantra in a loud voice ..." Therefore, Rupa GosvamI, an
eyewitness to the activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
recipient of His full blessings and empowerment for establishing
His mission, personally testifies here that Lord Caitanya did not
confine the maha-mantra to inaudible muttering, but loudly
proclaimed it to all.

2. Radharamanacarana Dasa BabajI also introduced the Sakhibheki
doctrine by dressing his follower Sri Jayagopala Bhattacarya as
Lalita Sakhi. This was against Mahaprabhu's teaching as well, as
an ordinary jlva was being worshipped as though he were an
expansion of Srlmatl Radharanl.

Both Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Siddhanta Sarasvatl instructed
the BabajI to give up these fallacious practices, but he refused. Siddhanta
Sarasvatl began to preach publicly and strongly against these
misconceived teachings, proclaiming that the maha-mantra is for both
japa and klrtana, and that klrtana is ultimately superior to japa. This
created quite a controversy in Purl with many taking the side of the
BabajI out of misplaced sentiment and others siding with Siddhanta
Sarasvatl.

During this period Siddhanta Sarasvatl was engaged in the compilation
of a Vaisnava encyclopedia which contained an explanation of Vaisnava
terminology, brief biographies of great Vaisnavas, an introduction to the
books of the Vaisnava acaryas, a description of the Vaisnava tlrthas, the
various conclusions of Vaisnava sects, etc. He called it Vaisnava-


19



Manjusa-Samahriti, and it was later published in four volumes. A
Vaisnava scholar commented on it by saying, "This work is only possible

s

for a supra-mortal, a great personality like Prabhupada Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura. Even if 25 to 30 scholars and 10 to 15 men taking the treasury
of a king began the work, they would be unable to edit it." The work of

compilation was begun in Purl and continued as Siddhanta Sarasvatl

>* /

made his preaching rounds of Sri Mayapur-dhama, Sri Jagannatha Purl-

/ /

dhama and Sri Vraja-dhama. Pie also studied the books of Srlla

s

Madhvacarya and Srlla Ramanujacarya and published some of them in
Bengali. He also published biographies of these and other Vaisnava
saints in the Sajjana-Tosani magazine of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

He toured South India in 1904 and again in 1905-places like Tirupati,

s

Srlrangam, Singhachal, Raj Mahendry, Madras, Perambadur,
Conjeveram, Kumbhakonam and Madurai. While on tour he collected
all the information about the rites and rules of Vedic tridanda Vaisnava
sannydsa from a Ramanuja tridandi swami at Perambadur. Wherever he
would go in his travels he would lecture, write and debate the learned
panditas of the day. He soon acquired such a reputation that his name
would strike fear in the hearts of his philosophical adversaries. All bogus
cults and sects were doomed in his presence.

However, in Purl, Siddhanta Sarasvatl experienced such severe
oppression and censure due to his preaching against the rhyming klrtana
and sakhibheki doctrine of the popular Radharamanacarana Dasa BabajI

that finally Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura instructed him to go and

/

perform bhajana near the Yogapltha, the birthsite of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.


Nama-Bhajana


In 1905, at the age of 31, he began his great vow, following the example
of Namacarya Haridasa Thakura, of chanting three lakhs of names (192
rounds) per day. He determined that at the rate of 300,000 names daily,
it would take about 9 years to complete one billion names. He resided in


20




a grass hut at the Yogapitha for four years, and in February of 1909 he

built a cottage near the Yogapitha at Vrajapattana (town of Vraja) on

/ — /

the site of the house of Sr! Candrasekhara Acarya, the uncle of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This place is considered to be non-different from
the banks of Radhakunda. There he remained, uninterruptedly
executing his chanting. He strictly followed his vow and observed
Caturmasya, cooking rice (which had been dried in the sun) in ghee and
eating it from the floor in the manner of a cow. He would take rest lying
on the ground, never using any pillows and constantly chant and study
the scriptures. Seeing his renunciation, his Gurudeva, Srlla Gaura
Kisora Dasa BabajI Maharaja said, "I observe that the renunciation of Sri
Rupa-Raghunatha is manifest in my Prabhu." He used to address his
disciple as "my Prabhu."

In commenting on this period Srlla Prabhupada states, "From childhood
he was a strict brahmacari, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI
Maharaja. And he underwent very severe penances for starting this
movement: world-wide movement. That was his mission."

When the roof of his kutir became broken, rather than take time away
from his chanting, he would simply use an umbrella when it rained and
go on chanting. Sometimes, he had to go to different places, but he
continued very strictly and completed his vows always.

In 1906 Sri Rohinikumara Ghosh, (the nephew of Chandramadhava
Ghosh Mahasaya, a former justice of the Calcutta High Court), had a
wonderful dream, and as a result approached Siddhanta Sarasvatl for
initiation. The boy had gone to stay with some Bauls, a so-called guru
and his consort who he was instructed to address as "Mother" and
"Father". These persons were actually sinful rascals in the guise of
devotees, but while he was in Mayapur, he had the good fortune to hear
from Siddhanta Sarasvatl for a long time. He returned to the place of
the Baul, and feeling ill, he lay down to rest. In a dream, the Baul took
the form of a tiger and the consort, the form of a tigress. They were
about to devour the unfortunate lad who was trying his best to take
shelter of Lord Gaurasundara. At that moment Siddhanta Sarasvatl
arrived on the scene, chased the tigers away, and began to lead him to
Mayapur. The boy awoke at daybreak and proceeded to Mayapur where
he heard discourses from Siddhanta Sarasvatl for several days. Finally,


21



he begged for initiation from his savior so feelingly that Siddhanta
Sarasvatl took mercy on him.

Prior to this, Siddhanta Sarasvatl had never given initiation to anyone.
His character was such that he never regarded his disciples as his
disciples, but he used to see them as being that which was received from
the lotus feet of his guru. He used to address them as "Prabhu." In his
address to the Gaudlya Math's first Vyasa-puja, he has addressed his
disciples as, "My friends, rescuers from danger." He also wrote, "If a
Vaisnava does not do the work of a guru, then the spiritual Vaisnava
lineage will stop. Again, if he does the work of a guru, then he becomes a
non-Vaisnava. For if a guru thinks, 'I am a guru.' then the first 'u' letter
in the word guru disappears (the word becomes 'gam' or cow). A real
guru does not make disciples and thus remains a guru. Here we see
Siddhanta Sarasvatl giving a very strong warning about entertaining the
conception of overlordship or being the master of anyone. His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada observed that when he
offered obeisances to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, he used to
return, "Daso 'smi": "I am your servant." And in a lecture in 1973 on the
occasion of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's Disappearance Day
observance, Srila Prabhupada in the same ecstatic mood spoke, 'Anyway,
it is by his grace I was forced to give up my family life, and he brought
me some way or other in preaching his gospel. So, this is a memorable
day. What he desired, I am trying a little bit and you are all helping me,
so I have to thank you more. You are actually representatives of my
Guru Maharaja, because you are helping me in executing the order of
my Guru Maharaja. Thank you very much."

In the course of Siddhanta Sarasvatl's travels throughout India he
became much pained at the erroneous teachings of many pseudo sects
and sahajiya groups. There arose in his heart a burning desire to widely
preach the true siddhanta according to the desire of the Six Gosvamls
and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Although Srila Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI
ordinarily never allowed anyone to touch his feet, he had voluntarily
placed his feet on the head of Siddhanta Sarasvatl and ordered him to
preach extensively and advised him, "... to preach the Absolute Truth

and keep aside all other works." Siddhanta Sarasvatl said of this

/

occasion: "On receiving just a touch of the lotus feet of my Sri


22



Gurudeva, I lost all sense of this external world. I do not know whether
any transcendental agent equal to him in greatness has ever appeared in
this world. How may those, who are busy with the lust, anger, etc. of the
world ever know him?"


Vaisnavas & Brahmanas

♦ ♦ •


In 1911, a great controversy arose over the relative positions of
brahmanas and Vaisnavas. Various caste gosvamls, members of different
smarta groups, etc. raised a huge agitation, and so a great conference was
organized in the Midnapore District of Bengal to settle the issues.
Famous panditas, scholars and spiritual leaders from all over India were
to attend. The contentions of the Karmajada Smartas were:

1. Even if a person appearing in a siidra family is initiated by
Pahcaratrika initiation, according to the Vaisnava scriptural rules,
still he remains unfit to worship salagrama-sila.

2. Anyone not taking his birth in a brahmana family (seminally
born) cannot perform all the duties of a brahmana. And even if he
is an uttama-adhikarl, he can never become an acarya.

This was the smartas' attempt to establish their seminal successions as

the legitimate and supreme spiritual authority, and to prove the

/

inferiority of the Vaisnavas. They were incensed at Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura's preaching in the line of Srlla Sanatana GosvamI (which had
gained increasing acceptance) that anyone, regardless of birth, could
become a brahmana and a Vaisnava and was fit to offer Vedic sacrifices,
worship the Deity, etc.

Of course, this was a conflict with a long history. In the past, exalted
Vaisnava acaryas , who were born in non-brahmana families, had
initiated persons who were born in brahmana families, because it was
understood by the Vaisnava acaryas that in the age of Kali, everyone is
sudra by birth. Qualification comes by training and temperament. Sri

s /

Syamananda Prabhu had initiated Sri Rasikananda, although


23




Syamananda was not a seminal brahmana. Srlla Narottama dasa Thakura
initiated two seminal brahmanas, Ganganarayana CakravartI and Sri
Ramakrishna Bhattacarya. Aside from the historical precedents, there
were many scriptural evidences supporting this practice.

Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura was invited to the conference, but he was
bed-ridden at the time with rheumatism. Exasperated, he roared out, "Is
there no one manifest in the Vaisnava world who is capable of meeting
with them and by the conclusions and original logic of the scriptures put
an end to their lowly activities, which are nothing but the frenzied
dance of the three material qualities?"

At this, Siddhanta Sarasvatl then wrote an essay entitled, Brahmana o

Vaisnavera Taratmya Visayaka Siddhanta, or The Conclusion Concerning

/

the Comparison of Brahmins and Vaisnavas. He then read it to Srlla
Bhaktivinoda Thakura. The Thakura was so ecstatic when he heard the
powerful logic and scriptural evidences put forward by his brilliant son
that he sat up and proclaimed, "Sarasvatl, truly, truly Sarasvatl! Truly,
truly he is the acarya-sun illuminating the face of the Vaisnava world.

By the light of these judgements the darkness of the Karmajada Smartas'
doctrine will certainly soon be dispelled!"

At three P.M. on Friday, the eighth of September, 1911, the meeting was

to begin at Midnapore District at Balighai, Uddhavapura. Siddhanta

/

Sarasvatl set out from Calcutta, accompanied by a follower of Srlla
Bhaktivinoda Thakura named Srlyukta Sureshchandra Mukhopadhyay,
on September sixth. In attendance at the meeting were Srlla
Madhusudana GosvamI from Radha Ramana, Srlla Visvambharananda
Deva GosvamI (from Srlla Syamananda Prabhu's line) and a follower of
Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura called Sri Sltanatha Bhaktitlrtha Mahasaya.
All of them saw to it that Siddhanta Sarasvatl was received with all the
honor of an deary a. The panditas of the Karmajada Smartas were also
present, as well as descendants from various caste gosvami families who
supported them.

By everyone's consent Srlla Visvambharananda Deva GosvamI accepted
the Chair of the meeting. Siddhanta Sarasvatl then presented his paper
to the huge assembly. The paper was divided into two sections: the
Prakrtajana section and the Harijana section. Initially he began to recite
the glories of the brahmanas. The opposing panditas were beside


24



themselves with joy. They had no idea that there were so many verses

glorifying brahmanas, and they eagerly heard Siddhanta Sarasvatl speak.

However, Siddhanta Sarasvatl then began to explain and define the

brahmana, the Vaisnava, the relationship between the two, the

qualifications of a guru, etc. And then the opposition's joy quickly

subsided. When no one could offer a strong argument in response, a

huge uproar commenced. Some counter-arguments were given, but

Siddhanta Sarasvatl immediately refuted their contentions with searing

logic. The meeting went on in this way for three days. Backing up

/

Siddhanta Sarasvatl were Sri Madhusudana GosvamI, Sarvabhouma
/ /

Srlyukta Ramananda Dasa BabajI, and Srlyukta Sltanatha Bhaktitirtha
Mahodaya. They all offered strong arguments that no matter what
family a Vaisnava appears in, he is perfectly qualified to worship the
salagrama-sila and recite the Vedas.

On the final day, Siddhanta Sarasvatl was the concluding speaker. He
spoke brilliantly with great vigor and incredible rhetoric for two hours.
When he finished, no one on the opposing party could say a word. There
was simply no way to counter him.

There was a huge uproar in acclaim of the brilliant acarya. Thousands of
people rushed forward to take the dust of his lotus feet. The guards
pleaded with the people to remain peaceful, and they would certainly
have their desires fulfilled. Taking Siddhanta Sarasvatl to a separate
place, the guards forcibly took his feet and dunked them into a basin of
water. The acarya objected strongly, as it was his principle not to allow
anyone to touch his feet, and if anyone offered obeisances to him, he
would immediately offer them obeisances in return. Yet the guards,
desiring to protect him from the press of the crowd, took this action,
adding a few buckets of water to the quantity and distributed it to the
crowd. In this way the people felt satisfied and blessed, and they
exhausted the entire supply in no time. Siddhanta Sarasvatl was thus
acclaimed as the greatest hero of the conference.


The Gaura Mantra


25




Later in 1911 another controversy surfaced, challenging that the name
Gaura in the Gayatri mantra chanted by Gaudlya Vaisnavas was not an
eternal name of Godhead, was not found in the original Vedas , and that
Lord Caitanya was not an incarnation of Godhead, but rather, by His
own admission, a devotee of God.

Although it is clearly established in the pages of Caitanya-bhagavata and
Caitanya-caritamrta that Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself, there were some persons who did not believe that His
position as an avatara was revealed in the original Vedas. Of course one
actual proof of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's divinity was the darsanas He
provided to a number of exalted devotees during the maha-prakasa
manifestations in the home of Srlvasa Thakura, to Lord Nityananda as a
six-armed Visnu form, as Sad-Bhuja to Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, as
Radha-Krsna to Srlla Ramananda Raya, and so on. These proofs along
with many convincing verses supplied by Krsna dasa Kaviraja and
Vrndavana dasa Thakura in their Caitanya-caritamrta and Caitanya-
bhagavata, repectively, were sufficient for reasonable men. But the more
stubborn worldly scholars and critics wanted proof from the original
Vedas. The smartas objected to the worship of the Deity form of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and claimed that the Gaura-mantra was not an
eternal Vedic mantra.

Siddhanta Sarasvatl cited proof from the Sruti, particularly from the
Caitanyopanisad from the A tharva Veda:

sa hovaca: rahasyam te vadisyami, jahnavi-tire navadvipe
golokakhye dhamni govindo dvibhujo gaurah sarvatma
maha-puruso mahatma maha-yogi trigunatitah sattva-rupo
bhaktim loke kasyatiti. Tad ete sloka bhavanti

Brahma said: "I shall tell thee a secret! On the bank of the Jahnavl, at
Navadvlpa, which is called Goloka Dhama, shall Govinda, in a two
armed form, as Gaura, the Great One, the Great Mystic, Who is
transcendental to the three modes of material nature, and Whose form
is eternal, reveal Bhakd to the world! There are a number of verses in
that regard." [Text 5].

Other evidence was cited from the Svetasvatara Upanisad, as well as the
Smrti, Tantras, Puranas, and especially the Srimad-Bhagavatam.


26



Siddhanta Sarasvatl addressed a large assembly at Navadvlpa's Bada
Akhada Hall, where many erudite scholars had gathered, headed by Sri
Madhusudana GosvamI Sarvabhauma. He forcefully and brilliantly
proved the eternality and glory of the Name, Form, Attributes, etc. of
Sr! Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Although Siddhanta Sarasvatl was unaware
of it, Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI was there in one corner of the
meeting, and when he heard Siddhanta Sarasvatl's lecture he was
extremely pleased with him. All of the Gaudlya Vaisnavas who heard
the discourse were filled with bliss and began to chant Siddhanta
Sarasvatl's glories again and again. Due, in large measure, to Siddhanta
Sarasvatl's strong preaching on this point throughout his life, the Deity
form of Sri Caitanya. Mahaprabhu is now worshipped and accepted all
over India as the eternal form of the Lord, and many thousands have
received the Gaura mantra with great faith and for eternal benefit.

His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada commented
on Siddhanta Sarasvatl's strong preaching against the caste gosvamis and
smartas:

"My Guru Maharaja's contribution is that he defeated the caste gosvamis. He
defeated this brahmanism. He did it the same way as Caitanya Mahaprabhu
did. As Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, kiba vipra, kiba nyasl, sudra kene naya,
yei krsna tattva-vetta, sei 'guru' haya: 'There is no consideration whether one
is a sannyasl, a brahmana, a sudra, or a grhastha. No. Anyone who knows the
science of Krsna, he is all right, he is gosvam! and he is brahmana.'

"This was my Guru Maharaja's contribution. And for this reason, he had to
face so many vehement protests from these brahmanas of the caste gosvamis.
"Once they conspired to kill him-my Guru Maharaja told me personally. By
his grace, when we used to meet alone he used to talk about so many things.

He was so kind that he used to talk with me, and he personally told me that
these people, 'They wanted to kill me.'

"They collected twenty-five thousand rupees and went to bribe the police
officer in charge of the area, saying, 'You take these twenty-five thousand
rupees. We shall do something against Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl, and you
don't take any steps.' He could understand that they wanted to kill him. So
the police officer frankly came to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl: 'Of course, we
accept bribes, and we indulge in such things, but not for a sadhu, not for a
saintly person. I cannot dare.' So, the police officer refused and said to my
Guru Maharaja, 'You take care. This is the position.' This was because he so
vehemently protested.


27



"When my Guru Maharaja was present, even big, big scholars were afraid to
talk with even his beginning students. My Guru Maharaja was called 'living
encyclopedia'. He could talk with anyone on any subject, he was so learned.

And no compromise. So-called saints, avataras, yogls-everyone who was false
was an enemy to my Guru Maharaja. He never compromised. Some
Godbrothers complained that this preaching was a 'chopping technique' and
it would not be successful. But those who criticized him fell down."

In March of 1912 Siddhanta Sarasvatl was invited by Maharaja
Manindrachandra Nandi Bahadur to come to his Kaslmabazar Palace to
give some lectures about Krsna. Although Siddhanta Sarasvatl was there
for four days, he was prevented from glorifying the Lord except on one
short occasion by envious prakrta sahajiyas who were afraid that if the
king heard Sarasvatl Thakura, they would lose their positions.

Therefore, Siddhanta Sarasvatl refused to eat any of the foodstuffs sent
for him by the king on a golden plate. He took only one tulasl leaf, as he
considered that the atmosphere was contaminated by the materialistic
envious behavior of the sahajiyas, and that if he could not render service
to the Maharaja by glorifying Krsna before him, then he would not take
his foodstuffs. Thus, he remained fasting from the 21 st to the 24th of
March. On the fifth day he got an opportunity to speak for about five
minutes and was then shouted down. He decided to leave.

The Maharaja had been wrongly informed by the sahajiyas that
Siddhanta Sarasvatl had refused his food, accusing the king of being of
the Tili caste [a low caste], yet he sorrowfully met Siddhanta Sarasvatl at
the railway station and asked him to explain why he had fasted and why
he was leaving. Siddhanta Sarasvatl then told the king, "I did not get
any opportunity to glorify to you the message of the Absolute Truth
according to Srimad-Bhagavatam, so how shall I accept your things'?
Apart from that, the Lord does not accept the offered objects of a pujari
who is blind to the knowledge of the Absolute Truth. For that reason, it
is not prasada." He then left by train at 11 P.M. arid arrived at
Dhubuliya, getting down at 2:30 in the morning, and then walked five
miles to Vrajapattana, Mayapur, where he cooked and honored prasada.
This incident serves as a brilliant example of the principled and staunch
behavior a Vaisnava acarya must exhibit.

In November of 1912 Siddhanta Sarasvatl went on tour with some other


28



s

devotees to see some of the places visited by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and His associates like Sree Khanda, Jajigram, Katwa, Jhamatpur,
Akaihat. Chakhandi, Daihat, etc. While visiting those places he
preached pure devotional service unceasingly. Although Siddhanta
Sarasvatl was constantly immersed in chanting the Holy Name, at first

at the Yogapltha in Mayapura and then later at Vrajapattana, the site of

/

Sr! Caitanya Mahaprabhu's Vraja-lila dramas, he was always considering
how to preach. After Rohini Kumara Ghosh had had his amazing dream
earlier on and taken initiation, two other boys approached Siddhanta
Sarasvatl and were initiated in 1913, and were called Vaisnava dasa and
Paramananda Vidyaratna. On the 6th of February, 1913, Siddhanta
Sarasvatl rented a large house for 36 Rupees a month at #4 Sanagar Lane
in the Kalighata section of Calcutta. There he established the Bhagavat
Printing Press- the Sri Bhagavat-yantra, so that he could begin to publish
the important literatures of the Gaudlya Vaisnavas. He called the press
the Brihat M ridanga, explaining that an ordinary kirtana party could be
heard for only a few blocks, but this mrdanga could be heard far and
wide. He wanted to print the second edition of the Caitanya-caritamrta
with the A mritapravaha Bhasya by Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, and his
own Anubhasya, as well as the Srimad-Bhagavatam and other books. The

s

Bhagavad-gita with the Sarartha varsini commentary of Srlla Visvanatha

CakravartI Thakura, the Rasikaranjan commentary by Srlla

/

Bhaktivinoda Thakura, and the great poem Srlla Gaura-krishnadaya by
Govinda dasa were also printed. The press was moved to Vrajapattana in
1914, and later in 1915 it was moved to Krishnanagar.


The Disappearance Pastimes Of Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura And Srlla Gaura Kisora Dasa Babaji


/

On June 22nd in 1914 at the Bhakti Bhavan in Calcutta, Srlla

Bhaktivinoda Thakura performed his pastime of disappearance. His

/ /

samadhi was established at Sri Svananda-sukhada-kunja on December
27, 1914. At this time Siddhanta Sarasvatl took up the work of


29




publishing the Sajjana-Tosani, and the other books which had been left
unpublished by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

On November 17, 1915, Srila Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI Maharaja left the
mortal world on the Utthana Ekadasl. A terrible situation was created at
this juncture by various heads of mathas who wanted to have the
samadhi of Srila Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI as a means of fund-raising for
their own sense gratification. A first-hand account of this incident was
given in a biographical work about Siddhanta Sarasvatl called Sarasvatl-
jayasri:

"After the departure of BabajI Maharaja there were many types of opinions
and disturbances over who would give his samadhi. Hiralala Gosvam! and a
few other people sent Padmanabha Brahmacarl, alias Krsna Caitanya dasa, to
Srldhama Mayapura to fetch Srila Prabhupada (Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura), they also told me to go with him! Crossing over the river
by Kuliya's ferryboat, I saw Prabhupada coming with bare feet and covered by
a green chaddar. With him was Sriyukta Paramananda Brahmacarl. It was
then the period of Caturmasya-Prabhupada's hair and beard were long.

Seeing him, I prostrated in respect and told him in detail of the situation.

After crossing the river by ferry-boat, Prabhupada arrived at the Rani
Dharmasala. Srila BabajI Maharaja used to stay there. Various heads of
Navadvipa's Vaisnava gathering places had begun to argue amongst
themselves over taking Srila BabajI Maharaja's spiritually blissful body, and
they had begun to rise in order to give the samadhi: the reason being that in
the future the samadhi of such a perfect great person could be used as an
instrument to raise monetary income. Srila Prabhupada resisted such
illegitimate attempts of theirs. In apprehension of a breach of peace,

Navadvipa's Inspector of Police was then present at that place. The Detective
Department's Commissioner Raya Bahudar Yatindranatha Sinha Mahasaya
was then Navadvipa's Inspector of Police.

"After much controversy the Babajls said, 'Sarasvatl Thakura is not a
sannyasl, therefore he does not have the eligibility to give the samadhi for a
person who has renounced his home.' In reply to that, Prabhupada said in a
loud voice like thunder, 'I am the only disciple of' Paramahamsa BabajI
Maharaja. Even though I have not accepted sannyasa, I am a celibate
brahmacarl, and, by the grace of BabajI Maharaja. I am not secretly addicted
to abominable habits or involved in fornication as some monkey-like people
are. If there is someone amongst the people present who is a renunciate of
truly stainless character, then he can give BabajI Maharaja's samadhi. We
have no objection to that. He who within the last one year, or the last six
months, three months, one month or at least within the last three days has


30



not had any illicit contact with a woman will be able to touch this spiritually
blissful body. If anyone else touches it, he will be completely ruined.' Hearing
these words, the Inspector of Police said, 'How will evidence be had for this?
Prabhupada said, 'I will have faith in their word.' We became amazed at seeing
them all-after Prabhupada's words, the people present wearing the attire of
Babajls, one by one, turned their backs. The Inspector of Police was
speechless.

"Then, according to Srlla Prabhupada's instructions, we had the good fortune
to carry the spiritually blissful body of Paramahamsa BabajI Maharaja, which
was lying on the ground. Some people gave advice to us: 'When BabajI
Maharaja was manifest he said that his body should be dragged through the
streets of Sridhama Navadvlpa so that it may be bathed in the dust of this
holy land. It is befitting to observe the command of BabajI Maharaja.'

Prabhupada then said, 'Although we are fools, inexperienced and offenders
we will still not be disinclined to understand the true meaning of those
humility-filled words which were spoken by my Gurudeva in order to destroy
the pride of worldly-minded people, for even Krishnachandra personally
thinks Himself to be successful if He carries my Sri Gurudeva on His head or
shoulders. After the departure of Thakura Haridasa, Sri Gaurasundara took
the spiritually blissful body of the Thakura on His lap and danced. What
dignity He adorned it with! Therefore, following in the footsteps of Srlman
Mahaprabhu, we shall also bear BabajI Maharaja's spiritually blissful body on
our heads."

Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI Maharaja was placed in samadhi on the
17th of November, 1915. Sixteen years later, due to flooding, it had to be
moved, and there was a great clamor over who would claim the samadhi
and give it a new location. Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura commented that
those who were most sincere would be successful in locating the samadhi,
and his disciples were able to do so, moving the whole samadhi intact in
a boat accompanied by sankirtana from Navadvlpa to Mayapur where a
beautiful samadhi was built at Vrajapattana near the Radha-kunda.

In 1914 Kunjabiharl Vidyabhusana, who later took sannyasa and was
named Bhakti Vilasa Tlrtha Maharaja, had come to Mayapur and heard
from Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI Maharaja on the verse from
Caitanya-caritamrta: krsna bhakta niskama ... The BabajI then instructed
him to hear from "his guru" Siddhanta Sarasvatl. He then heard from
Siddhanta Sarasvatl on the verse from Caitanya-caritamrta: brahmanda
bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva ... and was so much impressed that he gave


31



up all aversion he had formally maintained against Vaisnavas and
determined to hear Siddhanta Sarasvatl seriously. He was afflicted with
many of the common misconceptions of the day about the nature of
sadhus and was on occasion upset by Siddhanta Sarasvatl's strong
language about such persons, but finally was fully convinced. He came
again, having secured two months leave from his job at the Calcutta
Post Office and arrived on the day that Om Visnupada Paramahariisa
Srila Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI entered the eternal pastimes of the Lord
in Koladvlpa on the Utthana Ekadasl, November 19, 1915.

After some days of hearing, Kunjabiharl asked for initiation and was
then inspired to propose to Sarasvatl Thakura that he make
arrangements for him to stay in Calcutta and give discourses so that
thousands of persons could be benefitted. While engaged in his bhajana
at Vrajapattana, Sarasvatl Thakura had often considered how he would

execute the preaching work that was desired of him by both of his

/ /

spiritual guides, Srila Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI and Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura. It was especially weighing heavily upon him after their
departure. He was feeling their separation keenly, living the words of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu that aside from separation from a devotee of
Krsna there is no other suffering. He humbly considered at that time,
"How shall I preach to the world the pure message of Sri Caitanya and
establish the heart's desire of my gurus? I have no support of people, no
support of wealth and I do not have any learning or intelligence which
can attract the common people."

He took rest that night, and at that time he saw in a visionary trance the
Panca-tattva and their sanklrtana associates, entering from the East into
the natyamandira of the temple of the Sri Yogapltha, the site of Lord
Caitanya's appearance, their effulgence lighting up the whole scene.
With them were Vaisnava Sarvabhauma Srila Jagannatha dasa BabajI
Maharaja, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, Srila Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI
Maharaja, and other previous acaryas. They gave him many assurances
and told him, "Don't you worry at all. With supreme enthusiasm preach
the conclusion of pure devotion, in intense earnestness chant the glories
of the Name, Abode, Form, Attributes, Associates and Pastimes of
Godhead at various places. All of us will help you. There is no need to
worry. The support of unlimited people, countless wealth and boundless


32



learning await the blessing of being engaged in the service of your
preaching. They will be received when they are necessary. No type of
worldly hindrance or danger will be able to make any obstruction for
this great work of yours. We are always with you."


Sannyasa


With this spectacular vision in mind as his impetus and at the urging of
his disciples, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura thought the time
had come for widespread preaching. Up until 1918 Siddhanta Sarasvatl
was mainly immersed in chanting and publishing books. In
Vrajapattana, Mayapur, on the full-moon day of Phalguna, the 29th of
March, 1918, Siddhanta Sarasvatl took sannyasa and took the name Sri
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI Maharaja at the age of 44, according

to the Vedic rites which he had gathered from the Ramanujas in his

/

travels. He took initiation from a picture of Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa
BabajI Maharaja. Taking sannyasa from a picture was certainly not a
standard practice of the Ramanujas. The situation, however, was unique.
Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura had no spiritual master who was physically
present, and he had no God-brothers, being the only disciple of Gaura
Kisora dasa BabajI. He was furthermore a self-realized soul, and there is
no doubt that he took sannyasa to fulfill the innermost desires of his
spiritual masters, who had both ordered him to preach. This practice was
never meant to be imitated by others in much less unique and less
qualified positions. He wanted to establish a mission that would take the
teachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world.

Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was beginning his preaching
effort towards the end of the First World War, in which many Indian
nationalists had taken part on the side of the British, thinking that this
might encourage the British to consider their desires for independence.
This was not to be. In 1919 the British passed the Rowlatt Act to repress
the move for Indian freedom, and one week later in Amritsar in the
square called Jallianwalla Bagh, British soldiers shot and killed hundreds


33




of unarmed, peaceful Indian protestors. Gandhi's non-cooperation
movement gained momentum-nationalistic fervour was at its height. It
was in the atmosphere of British rule and nationalistic foment, a time of
revolution, that Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura began his
preaching.

But as Srlla Prabhupada learned in his meeting with the great saintly

/

person in 1922, it was not a nationalistic revolution that Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was interested in igniting, but rather
the spiritual lives of humanity at large as described in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam:

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin prati-slokam abaddhavaty api
namany anantasya yaso 'nkitani yat

srnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah

"On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes, etc., of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental
words directed toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of
this world's misdirected civilization. Such transcendental literatures,
even though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by
purified men who are thoroughly honest."

He wanted to effect the upliftment of mankind throughout the world to
the eternal, spiritual platform of Krsna consciousness, where all strife,
sectarianism, social discord, etc., were resolved forever. The means were
the teachings of the liberated sages in the form of transcendental books-
he aimed to propagate the great science of self-realization far and wide.
Traditionally, the followers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, beginning
with the Gosvamls of Vrndavana had accepted the babajl-vesa (dress).
According to the tradition, one does not accept a brahmana's thread (or
gives it up if he has accepted one) and does not carry a danda. One
wears only a short white wrapper and a top piece. The idea is that when
one has reached the liberated platform, he rids himself of any item of
dress or symbol of varnasrama-dharma (activities within the modes of
nature, of which the sacred thread and sannyasa asrama are perceived as
part) and makes his only business the chanting of the Holy Name in the


34



mood of a bhajananandi. This is considered the final, transcendental

stage of a paramaharinsa Vaisnava. This had been the convention since
/

the time of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

Some persons also thought that to maintain the sacred thread and to

/

accept tridanda-sannyasa were practices opposed to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's teaching on the principle of humility: trnad api sunicena.
However, this is a fallacious view. Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura has explained it in the following light: If the sacred thread is
not taken at the time of initiation, this constitutes contempt for the
process of initiation. The thread is not to signify brahminical pride that
"I am meant to be served by everyone." But rather it is a sign that one
has been purified by the lotus feet of a guru. The thread is meant to
indicate eternal service to the Lord, not egoism. And as far as accepting
sannydsa is concerned, that is for increasing one's serving mood-to serve
the Lord with one's mind, body and words. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
taught this when He took sannydsa by chanting the verse of the Avanti

brahmana who took tridanda-sannyasa and which is described in the

/

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 11.23.56:

etariri sa asthaya paratma-nistham
adhyasitam purvatamair maharsibhih
aharh tarisyami duranta-param
tamo mukundanghri-nisevayaiva

"I shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of nescience by being
firmly fixed in the service of the lotus feet of Krsna. This was approved
by the previous acaryas, who were fixed in firm devotion to the Lord,
Paramatma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The characteristics of a gosvaml are described by Srlla Rupa GosvamI in

/

the first verse of Sri Upadesamrta:

vdco vegarh manasah krodha-vegam
jihva-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etdn vegan yo visaheta dhirah
sarvam apimam prthivim sa sisyat

"A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind's demands,


35



the actions of anger and the urges of the tongue, belly and genitals is
qualified to make disciples all over the world."

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI Maharaja wanted to show an
example to persons of the world from within the parameters of the
varnasrama system. Daivl-varnasrama, or the practice of executing the
principles of varnasrama-dharma by those who simultaneously practice
and preach the practice of sadhana-bhakti, was also much extolled by
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his writings and was especially discussed
by him in his C aitanya-siksamrta. Therefore, to set a personal example of
how the preacher, who comes to the madhyama-adhikarl platform for his
preaching work, also follows the principles of varnasrama for the sake of
showing an example to his followers, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
GosvamI Maharaja took sannyasa.

He also wanted to show by this action that he was actually taking a
humble position below his two gurus, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura and
Srila Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl, who had both accepted the
paramahamsa-vesa. At that time, many sense gratifiers and bogus
sahajiyas were wearing babajl dress and Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura wanted to exhibit, by personal example, just how exalted such
personalities should be if they want to wear the same dress as Srila Rupa
GosvamI, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, Srila Gaura Kisora dasa Babajl
Maharaja, and other exalted eternal associates of the Lord. So with a
view to exhibit the activities of a gosthy-anandl, a preacher, he accepted
the dress of a sannyasi.

For his preaching work, Srila Sarasvatl Thakura wisely chose to accept
sannyasa, as people in India naturally show respect to sannyasls, and this
was Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's motive as well: to save and attract
persons, who would have otherwise criticized Him or not taken Him

seriously. There was also further precedent in our line for this action, as

/ /

Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvatl, the author of Sri Caitanya-candramrta,

/ / /

Sri Navadvlpa-Satakam, Sri Vrndavana-Satakam, Sri Radha-
Rasasudhanidhih, and many other Vaisnava works also accepted
tridanda-sannyasa.

His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada also explains

s

in his commentary on the Srlmad-Bhagavatam verse about the Avanti
sannyasi in Caitanya-caritamrta [M adhya-llla 3.6] that, "The most


36



intimate devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, namely Gadadhara
Pandita, accepted the tridanda-sannyasa and also accepted Madhava
Upadhyaya as his tridandi-sannyasi disciple. It is said that from this
Madhavacarya, the sampradaya known in western India as the
Vallabhacarya-sampradaya has begun. Srlla Gopala Bhatta Bose, who is
known as a smrty-acarya in the Gaudlya Vaisnava sampradaya, later
accepted the tridanda-sannyasa order from Tridandipada
Prabodhananda Sarasvatl."

Thus with solid historical precedent and a mood to preach widely, Srlla
Sarasvatl Thakura, on the same day as he accepted sannyasa, established
a temple at Vrajapattana called the Caitanya Math and installed the
Deities Sr! Sri Guru-Gauranga-Gandharvika-Giridharl.

He began to preach in the immediate locality in Krishnanagar,
Dalautpur, etc. In June he left Calcutta with a group of 23 devotees for
Jagannatha Purl, and he visited Sauri, Kumar a, etc. on the way and saw
Goplnatha at Remuna. At Balasore he lectured on the Siksastaka, and
he also gave discourses in Cuttack and Purl.

While in a forested area in Alalanatha, near Jagannatha Purl, Srlla
Sarasvatl Thakura entered a state of deep ecstasy and trance
(vipralambha) , having realized the non-difference of this forest and the
forest of Vrndavana, and lost his external awareness of the world. When
he came back to his external consciousness alone in the woods, he could
not determine where he was. Meanwhile, his followers, who had
originally assumed that he gone to the forest to answer the call of
nature, became very worried about him and began to search for him

everywhere. Finally, they found him and led him out. As he traveled to

/ /

the various sites of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes, Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura was overwhelmed on several occasions with symptoms of
ecstasy and would always cite and chant the appropriate verses from
Caitanya-caritdmrta to commemorate the mood and activities of the
Lord in those sites.

During this tour when Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura and his followers were
returning from a darsana of Saksi-gopala, he noticed that his
householder followers refused to give alms to some poor people who were
requesting help. He then sarcastically described their attitude as, "Money
should not be given to poor, distressed people ... if it is given it will be


37



karma-kanda.”

[Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura was satirizing the attitude of his disciples who
were thinking that it was beneath them, as transcendental Vaisnavas, to
give charity to the poor, as though this were a continuing activity within
the realm of karmic activity.]

He stated that, "This type of consideration by householders expresses
miserliness, mercilessness, and a lack of affliction at others' distress.

From this attitude the heart becomes hard and attacked with
niggardliness, and as a result the tendency to spend money even for
Visnu's service, which is the means of one's own interest, disappears.
Therefore, offense in service (seva-aparadha) is invited. In order to

s

guard against all these hypocritical, sinful deliberations, Sri
Gaurasundara in His pastimes used to give help to lowly, distressed
people. Even earned wealth is obtained by the mercy of God. It is not
the incorrect use of wealth if some portion of mercy is given to
requesting poor people-it is its proper use! To distribute mercy (prasada)
is the compulsory duty of householder Vaisnavas. Even though their
(poor people's) miserableness has been obtained through the fault of
their own karma ... they are still God's people. Therefore, to give them
help is the compulsory duty of well-to-do people. However, to think of
them as 'Narayana' is only blindness to truth and a terrible spiritual
offense!"


Spiritual Organization: The Visva-Vaisnava-Raja-Sabha

And The Gaudlya Math


In November of 1918 Kunjabihari Vidyabhusana rented a house for fifty

rupees near the temple of Paresanatha at No. 1 Ultadanga Junction
/ /

Road, and Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura established the Sri Bhaktivinoda
Asana there. Although there was no arrangement for rent, some of the
householder disciples of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura took
up the responsibility for maintaining the preaching effort. Kunjabihari
Vidyabhusana worked to support the preaching by getting government


38




service.

Here we see some obvious parallels to the way that Srila Prabhupada
started out: the vision of the forms of Krsna on the Jaladuta, the small
store-front beginnings, the disciples getting a place without knowing
how the rent was to be paid but with great faith in the paramahamsa,
carrying on by getting some ordinary jobs, etc. This was the beginning of
fulfillment promised in both the visionary experiences, the only thing
required was the sincere effort to satisfy Krsna, and that was certainly
there in abundance. This example, in the lives of Srila Sarasvatl
Thakura and Srila Prabhupada underscores the power of saranagati,
total surrender to the mercy of Krsna. The secret to success is clearly
contained in Krsna's often-quoted but not easily followed instruction to
Arjuna: sarva-dharman parity ajy a mam ekarin saranam vraja. There is no
material formula, just sincere endeavor to please Krsna. Krsna had

assured Arjuna, "Do not fear." The same assurance had been given to

/ /

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura at the Yogapltha and to Srila
Prabhupada on the Jaladuta. If one undertakes the most auspicious work
of trying to deliver the mercy of Caitanya Mahaprabhu to the lost souls
of this age, he will never fail, and he will become a recipient of the
merciful glance of the Lord. This should be learned from the living
examples of the acaryas.

In December of 1918 Srila Sarasvatl Thakura set out with ten devotees
on a preaching tour. His first stop was in Yasohara, and an engagement
was held in the house of a famous lawyer named Raya Bahadur and
discourses were held in his house which culminated in a Vaisnava
conference chaired by Srila Sarasvatl Thakura. During, the conference
he gave an ecstatic lecture about Srila Haridasa Thakura. who had been
born in a Muslim family at Butana Pargana in the Yasohara District. At
the end of the lecture he concluded:

yei bhaje, sei bada, abhakta-hina chara;
krsna-bhajane nahi jati-kuladi-vicara

"He who worships is great. Non-devotees are of no consequence. There is
no consideration of caste, family, etc. in the worship of Krsna. This was
followed by powerful safikirtana in the city of Yasohara.

From there the preachers proceeded to the Khulna District, and in the


39



house of Nepalchandra Mahasaya they held a big meeting and devotees
from all the neighboring villages attended. At this time there were some

arguments offered about Vedic varnasrama-dharma and devotional

/

behavior. By explaining verses from the Srimad-Bhagavatam and the
Satvata-smrti as proof, Srila Sarasvatl Thakura defeated those
arguments, explaining the glories of daivl-varnasrama when determined
by one's personal qualities, and one's devotional activities. Even though
there were persons in that village who were very offensive in their
attitude and behavior, Srila Sarasvatl Thakura personally went door-to-
door with his followers in the mood of Lord Nityananda in His dealing
with Jagai and Madhai, being very compassionate towards their
unfortunate state.

From there, they proceeded to Banagrama where Srila Sarasvatl
Thakura met with an old student of his from the time he was teaching
astrology at the Sarasvata Chatuspathi in Calcutta. At that time his old
student sat down next to him, as was their previous custom, and one of
the disciples of Srila Sarasvatl Thakura gave his chaddar, so that his
spiritual master would get some special seat of honor. The old student,
who was by then a prominent lawyer, became offended and objected to
this. The point was that as a former disciple of Srila Sarasvatl Thakura it

s

was not proper for him to assume an equal position, especially since Srila
Sarasvatl Thakura had now become a tridandi-sannyasl. Srila Sarasvatl
Thakura did not object, but it was pointed out by his followers that this
was an exhibition of humility on his part. When Krsnadasa Kaviraja
GosvamI says:

jagai-madhai haite mui se papista,
purisera kita haite mui se laghista

"I am more sinful than Jagai and Madhai, I am lower than a worm in
stool." It is not that one is to take him at his word. One in the position of
a guru and sannyasi is always to be so honored by his disciples.

On the 1st of January the sankirtana party performed sankirtana in the
city of Banagrama and then returned to the Sri Bhaktivinoda Asana in
Calcutta.

/

On the 5th of February, 1919, at the Appearance Day celebration of Sri
Vishnupriya, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura re-established the


40



Sri Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha and gave a talk on the history of the sabha,

which was later to be known as the Gaudlya Mission. At the end of each

/ /

of Srlla Jlva GosvamI Prabhupada's Sat-sandarbhas the name of the Sri
Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha is inscribed. He wrote that the Visva-vaisnava-
raja-sabha refers to the society which is composed of those Vaisnavas
who are the kings (the foremost) of all the Vaisnavas present in this
world. These foremost Vaisnavas are the followers of the feet of Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu Who is the savior of Kali-yuga (the
Bestower of knowledge about spiritual relationship), the Bestower of His

own method of worship (the Bestower of the means) and Who is the

/

incarnation of krsna-prema, even though He is Sri Krsna Himself, the
Embodiment of krsna-prema. The objects of respect for this Sri Visva-
vaisnava-raja-sabha are Srlla Rupa GosvamI and Srlla Sanatana
GosvamI, who are the associates of Mahaprabhu. Their teachings are the
Bhagavata-dharma. These teachings constitute the Bhagavat-sandarbhas
or the Sat-sandarbhas. Therefore, the members of the Sri Visva-vaisnava-
raja-sabha are those people whose hearts have been illuminated by the
light of the Sat-sandarbhas.

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura explained that when the world suffers
misfortune and when there was apathy to such pure knowledge, the
sabha conceals itself. After the disappearance of Srlla Visvanatha
CakravartI Thakura and Srlla Baladeva Vidyabhusana, the sabha was
self-concealed for some time.

The famous Calcutta paper A mrita Bazar Patrika reported the event in
this way in 1919:

"On Wednesday last [5th instant] was celebrated with great eclat the Advent
ceremony of Sree Sree Vishnupriya Devi at the Sree Asana [1, Ultadanga
Junction Road]. The occasion was solemnised by the re-institution of Visva-
vaisnava-raja-sabha as inaugurated by no less a personage than Sree Jlva
GosvamI himself, eleven years after the passing of Sree Sree Mahaprabhu and
as given a fresh impetus by Sree Bhaktivinoda Thakura 33 years ago."

The Sajjana-Tosanl carried an essay based on Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's
talk, which was published that same year, a portion of which follows:

"On the recent birthday of Sri Vishnupriya many pure devotees joined
together at the Calcutta Sri Bhaktivinoda Asana and re-established the Sri


41



Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha. Even though this sabha (society) is eternally
established, it has descended into the world three times. Eleven years after
the disappearance of Srlman Mahaprabhu, when the world was beginning to
darken, six wonderfully bright stars arose in Sri Vraja-mandala and were
engaged in the service of Gaurachandra. Apart from these six brilliant stars,
there were several other great souls who beautified Sr! Gaurachandra's Visva-
vaisnava-raja-sabha. They were headed by Srlla Lokanatha GosvamI, Srlla
Bhugarbha GosvamI, and Srlla Kaslsvara GosvamI. Sixty-four dear associates
of Sri Gaurasundara increased the beauty of this Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha.
The twelve friends of Srila Nityananda Prabhu's Nama-Hatta was a main
branch of this Sri Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha.

"Sri Sri Bhagavat Krishna Chaitanyadeva is the saviour-incarnation for the
age of Kali. He is the Instructor of His own bhajana and of the knowledge of
relationship (sambandha-jnana). He is the Delineator of devotion which is
the means (abhidheya) and He is the Embodiment of Krishna-prema which is
the final goal ( pray oj ana). Another name for the devotees of Sri Gaura is
'Chaitanyadeva-charana-anuchara'. Sri Chaitanyadeva is Krishnachandra
Himself-the King of all the Vaisnavas in the world [Visva-vaisnava-raja]. The
gathering of His devotees is the Sri Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha; the foremost
ministers amongst the members of the society are Sri Rupa GosvamI and his
honoured Sri Sanatana GosvamI. Those who consider themselves to be the
followers of Sri Rupa are the members of this Sri Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha.
The leaders amongst them are Sri Sri Prabhupada Srimad Raghunatha Dasa
GosvamI and Sri Sri Prabhupada Srimad Jlva GosvamI. During the period of
misfortune for the world's inhabitants, after Sri Gaurachandra displayed the
play of His disappearance, Srimad Jlva Prabhu preached the Sri Bhagavata
dharma by the command of Sri Sri Rupa-Sanatana. The people who were
accepted as disciples by Sri Rupa-Sanatana-the leaders of the sabha, later
became the directors of the sabha. Sri Jlva Prabhupada, upon becoming the
director of the sabha, termed the teachings which Sri Rupa had propagated in
the sabha as the 'Bhagavata-sandarbhas' or 'Sat-sandarbhas'. The members of
the Sri Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha know these Sat-sandarbhas to be the
teachings of Sri Rupa-Sanatana and thus engage themselves in Sri Hari-
bhajana. The pure and transcendental method of worship which has been
given by Srimad Raghunatha Dasa GosvamI (one of the leaders of the Sri
Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha) by bearing the commands of Sri Rupa on his head,
is the only thing adorable by the devotees of Sri Gaura. By taking shelter at
the pure feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, Srlpada Krsnadasa Kaviraja
GosvamI Prabhu-the king of the family of rasika devotees (those devotees
who are able to comprehend the inner significance), became one of the
directors of the Sri Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha. Again, Sri Narottama Thakura
Mahodaya-the crest jewel of transcendental devotees, decorated the crown of


42



this Vaisnava-raja-sabha in the post of its director. Later, such kings of
devotees as Sri Sripada Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura spread their moon-
like rays upon the sabha. The darkness of night cannot always predominate
over the three-worlds which are covered by ignorance, therefore we
sometimes behold shining stars in the spiritual firmament which is bathed in
the moon-like rays of Sri Gaurachandra.

"In 399 Gaura Era (1885 A. D.), a brilliant star of the universal Vaisnava
firmament re-illuminated the Sr! Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha. During that
period many people in the great city of Calcutta received light from this
sabha. As a result of that light, the sight of the cooling rays of Sri
Gaurachandra reflected in loving eyes is nowadays visible in this world. Just
as autumnal clouds suddenly spread in the sky and cover the moon's rays, so
materialistic, non-Vaisnavas in the dress of Vaisnavas cause hindrances to
that transcendental light in society. Today, it is four years since the servant
of the King of universal Vaisnavas and the leader of the followers of Sri Rupa
departed from this world, and sometimes his light is becoming covered by
mist; seeing this, the group of people sheltered at the feet of the followers of
Sri Rupa have become firmly resolved to protect the light of discourses on
Hari from the strong gale.

"The transcendental flower of Krishna-prema that was budded forth by the
Acharyas headed by Sri Rupa, Raghunatha and Jlva was shown to the world
as a blossom by Srimad Bhaktivinode Thakura and after his disappearance it
has begun to fully bloom. The followers of Sri Rupa have protected that
beautiful and fragrant flower from the attack of depraved people and have
thus given aid to the olfactory function of the bees swarming at Sri Gaura's
feet. In this connection we request everybody to read the Adi Lila, ninth
chapter of the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta composed by the king of rasika
devotees about the divine loving activities of the Gardener Sri Chaitanya."

Although the language of the article is a bit flowery, it clearly describes

s

the history of the parampara since the time of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and aligns the purpose of the Society with the mission of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as it was revealed through the Six Gosvamls,
headed by Srlla Sanatana and Srlla Rupa Gosvamls, and as it descended

s / /

through Srlla Raghunatha Dasa GosvamI, Sri Jlva GosvamI, Srlla

/ /

Krsnadasa Kaviraja GosvamI, Srlla Narottama dasa Thakura, Srlla
Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura, Srlla Baladeva Vidyabhusana and re-
vitalized by Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura. So the parampara, or line of preceptorial descent, is
not strictly presented as a line of diksa, but rather more as a line of the


43



siksa of mahajanas, who have perfectly realized and are presenting the

/

original teachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in their purest form.

Following the re-institution of the Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha, a large
meeting was held at the Bengal Literary Society to honor Srlla
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, and many famous speakers honored him on that
occasion. On Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura's Appearance Day an
enormous festival was held for him at the Asana, at which time 1200

kilograms of rice were prepared, and thousands were served prasadam. It

/

was observed by Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's followers that after that
occasion there was never any lack of funds or other hindrances to any of
his plans or desires. Whatever he desired was seen to manifest. This is a
good example of the power of guru-puja. By properly honoring the pure
representative of Godhead, the grace of the Lord is invoked, and all
success is bound to follow.

The living situation at the Bhaktivinoda Asana at Ultadanga Road was
that Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura lived on the roof in one nice
room, and four household couples lived below. The sannyasls and
brahmacarls stayed in another area, begged from door-to-door,
worshipped the Deities, performed kirtana, and preached in various
places. In 1920 the Asana was renamed the Gaudlya Math and in 1922
began the publishing of a weekly magazine in Bengali, called the
Gaudlya , which was filled with preaching and glorification of the Lord.

It was there, of course, in 1922 that the fateful meeting with His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada took place, which has
been so nicely described in the Srlla Prabhupada-lllamrta Vol. 1. The
seed was then planted by Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura that
would lead to the fulfillment of his heartfelt desires and the predictions
of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Lord Caitanya: the chanting of the
Holy Name would be spread all over the world. So it was in the very

beginning days that the two transcendental titans met by transcendental

/

arrangement. As Srlla Prabhupada later commented, "He, in 1896,
Bhaktivinoda Thakura wanted to introduce this Krsna Consciousness
Movement by sending his, this book, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu His Life
and Precepts. Fortunately, that year was my birth year, and by Krsna's
arrangement we (Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and Srlla


44



Prabhupada) came in contact. I was born in a different family, my Guru
Maharaja was born in a different family. Who knew that I would come
to America? Who knew that you American boys would come to me?
These are all Krsna's arrangements. We cannot understand how things
are taking place."

In the course of his preaching, Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura personally
traveled all over India from the Himalayas to the ocean, and in that
course he circumambulated Navadvlpa-dhama, Gauda-mandala, Ksetra-
mandala, Vraja-mandala and the whole of India, accompanied by many
followers and wonderful sankirtana. Since a detailed catalogue of his
active preaching would fill many volumes, it will serve the purpose of
this brief history to attempt to summarize his activities by mentioning
some of the highest points, in as much as in a mountain range, the
highest peaks are especially note-worthy.

On June 27th, 1919, the deity form of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura was
installed in Godruma-dvlpa at Svananda-sukhada-kunja, at which time
Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura gave a profound lecture about service to the
guru and worship of the deity form of the acarya. He also arranged for
the completion of the Vaisnava-viswakosh, an encyclopedia of Vaisnava
vocabulary, which was the fulfillment of a desire of Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, and for which Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura had been collecting
material since 1900. In 1921, in Puri, he published a book called A char
and A charya which served as a great shock for so-called Vaisnavas who
had been making a business of religion. As is mentioned in Srlla
Prabhupada-lllamrta Vol. I: Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta condemned temple
proprietors who made a business of showing the Deity for a living. To be
a sweeper in the street was more honorable, he said. He coined a Bengali
phrase, salagrama-dvara badarin bhanga: "The priests are taking the
salagrama Deity as a stone for cracking nuts.' In other words, if a person
shows the salagrama form of the Lord (or any form of the Deity) simply
with a view to make money, then he is seeing the Deity not as the Lord
but as a stone, a means for earning his livelihood."

He revived the circurnambulation of Navadvlpa-dhama in the same year
and gave an amazing lecture in Dacca giving 30 interpretations of a
single verse of the Vedanta- siitra. He toured Vrajamandala during, this
period, trying to start a center there. In 1923 he attended the Purl


45



Ratha-yatra and danced before the Lord in ecstasy. He began to send out
many preaching parties to propagate the message of Lord Caitanya. In
1923 he also set up the Gaudlya Printing Works in Calcutta and began to
publish the Srlmad-Bhagavatam part by part with word for word
meanings, translations and purports.


The Four Sampradayas


In 1923 at Vrajapattana, work was begun on a beautiful, twenty-nine

pinnacled temple in which the four Vaisnava sampradayas and their

main acaryas are all honored. On each outer corner of the building there

/

is a deity alcove. In one we find the Brahma-sampradaya and Srlla

/

Madhvacarya, in another the Rudra-sampradaya and Srlla Visnusvami,

/

the Kumar a-sampradaya with Srlla Nimbarkacarya in another, and the
Laksml-sampradaya headed by Srlla Ramanujacarya on the fourth

/

corner. All of this can be seen as the temple is circumambulated. Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's idea was that, although there are
some distinctions in the teachings of the Vaisnava acaryas, they are
united in their opinion that the Lord is the Supreme Eternal Person,
meant to be served eternally by the eternal living beings. They had also
all written commentaries on the Vedanta refuting the impersonal
teachings of Sankaracarya.

s

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu praised certain conclusions of each deary a:

/

1. From Srlla Madhvacarya-his refutation of the Mayavada
doctrine and the worship of the form of Lord Krsna, knowing it to
be eternal.

>*

2. From Srlla Ramanujacarya-pure devotion and service to the
Vaisnavas.

/

3. From Srlla Visnusvaml-the attitude of God being one's all
and all and the raga-marga path of spontaneous devotion.

/

4. From Srlla Nimbarkacarya-the raga-marga and performing


46




bhajana following in the footsteps of the gopis.

By establishing the acintya-bhedabheda-tattva siddhanta Lord Caitanya
had perfected and completed the Vaisnava philosophy, and to make this
widely understood was Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's
mission.

Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura had gone to all the places of
the four acaryas, studied their books, their Deity Worship, etc. and he
published many of their writings, along with their life histories. His
attempt was to unify the Vaisnava world by propagating the sublime
teachings of Lord Caitanya in the form of the writings of the Six
Gosvamls of Vrndavana, especially Srlla Sanatana Gosvami, Srlla Rupa
Gosvami and Srlla Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, who are the Gaudlya
acaryas of sambandha-tattva, abhidheya-tattva, and prayojana-tattva,
respectively. These three acaryas committed to writing the teachings of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as they heard it from Him and His two most
intimate associates: Srlla Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and Srlla
Ramananda Raya. The Gosvamls established everything on the basis of
exhaustive, scriptural research, strong logic and ecstatic realization of
the Absolute Truth. It was exactly in this ocean of revelation that Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura swam and preached.

On February 24, 1924, on Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's
50th birthday, the Sri Vyasa-puja celebration was inaugurated. On that
occasion he gave a remarkable and often-cited lecture called Be Humbler
Than A Blade of Grass. The concluding remarks of the lecture are
reproduced in the Appendix. It should serve to enliven the reader with
the amazing humility of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's
expression.

Later in 1924, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura traveled and
preached vigorously, establishing a temple in Bhubaneswar and
preaching in Orissa, Dacca, Benares, and Allahabad, where he located
the spot where Lord Caitanya imparted His teachings to Srlla Rupa
Gosvami at the Dasasvamedha-ghata.

In 1925, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and his followers were
performing the circumambulation of Navadvlpa-dhama, which had been
a regular practice since 1921. The procession was proceeding with the


47



Deities mounted on the back of an elephant, and thousands of pilgrims

were loudly chanting the holy name. This circumambulation had a great

/

history beginning with Srlla Jiva GosvamI being led on the

circumambulation of the Dhama by Lord Nityananda Himself after the

disappearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. (This is recounted in detail

in Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura's Navadvipa-dhdma-mahatmya.) In the

Bhakti-ratnakar it is also recounted how Narottama dasa Thakura,

Syamananda Prabhu and his disciple Ramachandra Kaviraja also took
— /

this journey with Isana, the life-long servant of Mother Sacl. Krishna
Misra, one of the great devotee sons of Advaita Acarya, had some
descendants named Sri Jagabandhu (Bada Prabhu) and Sri Vlracandra
(Chota Prabhu) who established the worship of the Deity form of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Katwa. After they performed the installation,
they took sannyasa and also performed the circumambulation of Sri
Navadvlpa-dhama.

While Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura was proceeding with the roaring
procession with the Deities of Sri Sri Radha Govinda, a vicious crowd
attacked the procession throwing hundreds of stones and bricks.

Demonic persons, agitated by the preaching of Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura
(who had refuted the various bogus doctrines of the 13 Sahajiya sects
like the Aulas, Baulas, etc.) had instigated the local people against him.
Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura had also debunked, as he would throughout his
preaching, the nonsense practices of compulsory fees for viewing Deities
and the worship and recital of Srimad-Bhagavatam for money. He
strongly opposed the conversion of the Deities and the Srimad-
Bhagavatam into some sort of merchandise. Therefore, these persons
who tried to profit by these practices, led and instigated the local
populace to commit violence on the procession. Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura,
the Deities and the pilgrims were all pelted by these demons, but the
procession continued, unbowed. This was a living example of the adage,
"The jackals may howl, but the caravan will pass." An eye-witness wrote
in the A nanda Bazar newspaper, "Today, I saw the re-enactment of the
activities which were carried out four hundred years ago towards
Avadhuta Nityananda by the two wicked constables of Navadvlpa at
that time-namely Jagai and Madhai."


48



Daivi- V arnasrama


During this period (1925-1926) Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura
spoke widely on the topic of daivl-varnasrama, a theme he often dwelt
on throughout his preaching. For example, in an interview in 1929 with
Professor Albert Suthers of Ohio State University, he made the
following stunning analysis of varnasrama in response to a question on
the caste system:

Professor Suthers: Do you recognise caste distinctions? The caste

Hindus look down upon the other classes with an eye of contempt and

neglect. Do you too do so?

✓

Srila Sarasvatl Thakura: As the judgement of the Vaisnava philosophy is
favourable towards the service of God, the technologies giving
expression to it are also different from those of the ordinary judgements
of moralists of other sects. You have already heard that the Vaisnavas
have no regard for the morality or ethical principles of atheists. They do
not also pay much respect to the reality of the moral principles of the
theists in whose judgement worship of God is only of secondary
importance. They (the Vaisnavas) say that the service of God or love of
God is the principal matter. Other matters should be helpful and
subservient to that principal matter. When the two things, viz., innate
tendency and circumstance of man become ready to be helpful towards
the principal matter viz., God's service, then is established a good social
order known as daivl-varnasrama (divine system of castes and stages of
life). Till the natural tendency of the human soul is manifest, the
violation of this order causes much disorder and difficulty both
individually and aggregately. This caste system follows man's nature and
predilection. It is scientific to ascertain one's caste in accordance with
one's natural predilection. Much disturbance is created, both
individually and aggregately, on account of the non-acceptance of this
inviolable scientific principle of natural predilection as observed and
promulgated by our ancient sages of vast experience, and the wrong
adoption of the seminal principle only, i.e., the principle of determining


49




caste by birth alone. It is due to the fact that this principle of caste
determination was at one time perfect and nice at all points in India,
that even this day the Indians are able to stand erect with a challenging
mood before the world on the glorious foundation of the past. If we
examine the present social system of the Europeans, we find that
whatever beauty we find in that system has as its source the
determination of the caste or social order according to natural
predilection. There we find that a person having a martial tendency (i.e.
that for the life of a ksatriya) joins the army; another with a tendency of
a vaisya is engaged in improving commerce; those with the tendency
peculiar to siidras serve others. No society can work well, if it does not,
more or less, adopt the caste system based on natural inclination in some
form or another. Even among the European natives in marital relations
and during social feasts a distinction is made between the higher and
lower forms of society governed by natural predilection to which the
participants belong. Though the natural caste system is to a certain
extent adopted by the European Society, it has not yet acquired
scientific perfection. It can do so alongside of the progress in civilization
and knowledge. In India, however, this system attained to perfection on
the basis of the determination of the natural predilection. The great
history of India, viz., the M ahabharata, gives thousands of instances to
prove this fact. It is on account of the fact that in India such a system
was based on a scientific foundation that all other nations of the world
adored the Indians as their spiritual guides. Even the people of Egypt,
China, etc., received instructions in all matters with their heads bent
down before Indians.

We find in the ancient history of India that formerly there was only one
caste and that later on society became most scientifically divided into
the castes of brahmana, ksatriya etc., according to disparity in the
instinctive inclination for the service of Godhead. The A carya placed
one in the higher or lower grade of caste system according as the degree
of liking for God's service was high or low. Those who were attached
towards this service with the strongest devout ardour, and, as such
evinced the greatest intelligence, became brahmanas. They formed the
head of the huge body of the society. According to the guidance of the
head were conducted the hands, the thighs and the legs, viz., ksatriyas,


50



vaisyas and sudras respectively.

Please consider this: It is this head of ours that occupies the highest
place in our body, and it is the propellant of all our senses. What need is
there to say more, when all the senses, viz., the eyes, the ears, the nose,
the tongue and the skin are all combined in the head. It is there that
these along with the mind, intellect and egoism, are all settled. When
any other limb becomes disordered, its work may be conducted in some
other way: for example, when a hand is amputated, oftentimes its
function is managed by means of fixing up an artificial hand in its place.
But when the brain becomes defective or when the head is decapitated,
none of the limbs like the hands, legs, etc., can work. In the same way,
the head of the social body, which guides its intelligence indicates the
faculty of the brahmana. So prayer is offered for being directed with the
mood for serving God in the Gayatri-mantra (Rig Vedic hymn) to be
daily recited by a brahmana with a worshipful spirit. The brahmanas
have no other intellectual aptitude than such an ardent mood of service
to God-head. One is degraded to a ksatriya, vaisya or siidra according to
the degree of his fall from that ardent mood of divine service, under the
guidance of some other motive. The brahmanas represent the brain and
the mouth. The function of the brain is to regulate all with the aptitude
of devotion towards God, and that of the mouth is to propagate the
accounts about God. It is these brahmanas that are the real owners of
everything; because they are the Gosvamis or masters of the senses i.e.,
servitors of God. They do not misappropriate anything to their own use,
but they appropriate everything to God. For this, all persons of society
confide in them and choose them as their spiritual guides. They who,
instead of accepting such a brahmana, rather bear a grudge against him,
fall off from the path of all good. After this brain and mouth comes the
consideration of the arms to which are compared the ksatriyas, then that
of the thighs which the vaisyas represent, and then come the sudras,
who, on account of their base character and unsteady mind, are likened
to the feet. And those whose lives are altogether uncontrolled are
known as antyajas (untouchables) and regarded as outside the group of
the four classes as above. The Vaisnava philosophy recognises Daiva-
varnasrama-dharma which implies classification according to the divine
system by which men are divided into castes according to their natural


51



predilection. There arises no question of hating or disregarding any body
according to the system of varnasrama recognised by Mahaprabhu Sri
Caitanya Deva or according to the process of culturing devotion to God
as shown by Him, which is ever beyond that system. In the teaching
given by Him there is found instruction to show respect to every
creature in its relationship with God. The judgement of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is far superior to the slight improvement of the condition
of the lower castes as proposed by the modern social reformers, nay, it
far excels even the impartial equality as taught in the Gita. The proposal
of the worldly-minded moralists for slightly raising the status of the
lower forms of society has some extraneous motive as its cause; there are
various purposes hiding behind it, such as political objects, personal
interests, motive for acquiring fame and such other ends. These
subordinate principles have given rise to attempts for uplifting the lower
castes, which are of an extremely worldly character and clearly betray
their hyprocrisy. The instruction in the Gita to look on all as equal to
the self from the principle that all are souls is several times more
elevated than they, and is free from the worldly dirt. But the teaching of
Sri Caitanya Deva is not merely prohibitive of worldliness and based on
impartiality, but it is a positive one of the character of
transcendentalism.

Sri Caitanya Deva wants to engage all jlvas in the service of God and
thereby to elevate them to the highest status. He converts a crow to
Garuda (the prince of Eagles). The religion promulgated by Him is not
meant for Bengal alone, nor India even, but for all countries, all villages,
His is the universal religion for all creatures. So has He said: "My Name
will be propagated in all towns, all villages that exist in the world." His
universal religion of Love attracted animals, trees, grass, shrubs, creepers
and even the ferocious creatures like tigers, etc. from their outward
identification to the inward one of the very essential constitution,
having been spread among them too. The religion as promulgated by
Him is that of the soul; and not that of the society, physical, mental and
moral, and is not restricted to the usual form of devotion of the servant
to the Majestic Lord. His religion discovers the innate nature of the jlva
soul and is manifested in the unabated plenary love for God. According
to Him, Krishna is the Absolute Personality, the Spiritual Despot. The


52



religion of love consists in the full gratification of His Senses. The jlva
should be the fuel to the fire of the gratification of the Senses of the
unrestrained Autocrat Whose Will is law. It is the service of the
Autocrat under the guidance of those (devotees) who are well-
established in the eternal service of the gratification of the Senses of
Krishna (Who is the very Figure embodying the succulence in fulness
giving the utmost sensation of transcendental pleasure) that is the
object to be accomplished by a jlva and also the means to that end. The
difference between the Vaisnava philosophy and all the other
philosophies of the world lies in the fact that in the former both the
object of accomplishment and the means leading to it are identical
without any distinction. The means when purified and matured reveal
themselves as the Object. According to the Gaudlya philosophy the
chanting of the mellifluous Name of God constitutes both the end and
the means for it. This doctrine concerning the Name of God is a main
feature of this philosophy."

[It is doubtful that the good professor could grasp the Absolute nature of
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's words, but as we will see later
on when we quote from other portions of the interview, the good
professor was non-plussed with the brilliance of the spontaneous
exposition of the acarya and admitted as much to him.]

In 1926 Srila Sarasvatl Thakura sent his sannyasls out to Bengal, Bihar,
Orissa, and Northwest India to start centers. He met with Vaisnava
leaders and acaryas in Nathadwar, Bombay, Udupi and Salimabad, and
he also established temples in Naimisaranya and Mayapur. He conducted

the installation of the Deities and the forms of the Vaisnava acaryas at

/

the Sr! Caitanya Math in Vrajapattana, Mayapur.

In 1927 the Sajjana Toshani began publication in English, Sanskrit and
Hindi, the English edition being entitled the Harmonist. He preached
widely in Northern India and established more temples and even
traveled as far as Assam.

In 1928 at Kuruksetra, on the occasion of the solar eclipse, he preached
to thousands and thousands of persons, while absorbed in the mood of
separation of the gopis, and unveiled a diorama exhibition of Krishna's
meeting with the gopis , inducing everyone present to chant the names of
Lord Caitanya and Krsna. He also installed a Deity of Sri Caitanya


53



Mahaprabhu at a temple in Kuruksetra.


Scholars And Indologists


/

In Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's 1924 Vyasa Puja Address, the following
passage highlights a theme that arose frequently in discussions with
scholars:

"We do not find God in this world. The devotees, who serve God, out of their
mercy show themselves to us. We should follow their conduct and teaching. It
is the only path to our well-being. Due to our meagre education and small
experience, to most of us the ideas and ways of thinking of the devotees of
God appear to be unedifying 'slave mentality'. Let us not indulge in such
profane ravings under the urge of mental aberration. On the contrary, our
line of thought should be, 'Let the censorious people calumniate us to their
hearts' content. We will not mind them. Let us roll in the dust and forget
everything in the ecstasy of intoxication by excessive drinking of the strong
and tasty wine of the Love of Lord Hari.'"

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's references here to "slave mentality" can be
understood to be, at least in part, the reaction of the Indian intellectuals
of his time, who had been bewildered by a false presentation of their
own culture and religion. As the British had successfully brainwashed
many intellectuals in their educational institutions by making them
think that their religion was barbarous, backward, etc., the Indians
sometimes took it that the ways of the Vaisnavas represented something

useless from their past to enslave them in the stereotype fostered by the

>*

British of foolish, illiterate "Hindoos". Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura
comments on this in his book, The Bhagavat: Its Philosophy, Its Ethics
and Its Theology:

"'What sort of a thing is the Bhagavat: asks the European gentleman newly
arrived in India. His companion tells him with a serene look, that the
Bhagavat is a book, which his Oriya bearer daily reads in the evening to a
number of hearers. It contains a jargon of unintelligible and savage literature
of those men who paint their noses with some sort of earth or sandal, and
wear beads all over their bodies in order to procure salvation for themselves.


54




Another of his companions, who has travelled a little in the interior, would
immediately contradict him and say that the Bhagavat is a Sanskrit work
claimed by a sect of men, the Gosvamls, who give Mantras like the Popes of
Italy, to the common people of Bengal, and pardon their sins on payment of
gold enough to defray their social expenses. A third gentleman will repeat a
third explanation. Young Bengal, chained up in English thoughts and ideas,
and wholly ignorant of the pre-Mohamedan history of his own country, will
add one more explanation by saying that the Bhagavat is a book, containing
an account of the life of Krishna, who was an ambitious and immoral man!

This is all he could gather from his grandmother while yet he did not go to
school! Thus the Great Bhagavat ever remains unknown to the foreigners
like the elephant of the six blind men who caught hold of the several parts of
the body of the beast! But Truth is eternal and is never injured but for a
while by ignorance."

[Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, herein clearly describes the situation that
he, and later, Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura were forced to combat in their
preaching. Bengalis, in particular, and Indians, in general, had largely
been made into foreigners in their own land, due to the British
Sanskritists and educators, who had portrayed Vedic literature and
culture as something recent, barbaric, and inferior. Prabhupada once
commented that by this tactic, the British were able to do more harm to
Indian culture and religion in their short period of rule than the
Mohamedans were ever able to do in their much longer one. To this day,
although Indian pride in their great cultural and religious antecedents is
more developed due to the efforts of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, Srlla
Sarasvatl Thakura, Srlla Prabhupada and others, still the Sanskrit
dictionaries, text books on Indian religion and culture, etc. reflect this
cultural bias, the result of deliberate undermining work done by the
British in Indological studies with the disguised intention of asserting
the superiority of their own Christian-based cultural values and
outlook.]

In 1929 he had a series of meetings with Professor Albert E. Suthers
of Ohio State University and spoke to him on a number of topics,
including Vaisnavism and Christianity, transmigration, evolution,
idolatry, and avataras. Professor Suthers had come from Bombay to do
research for his course in comparative religions at Ohio State
University. He went to Calcutta to meet Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura, who


55



was at that time in Krishnanagar. So the professor journeyed there and
heard from him for three days consecutively. The professor, as will be
seen, was initially very argumentative and skeptical, but was clearly very

impressed with Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's presentation, and concluded

/

his visit with a pilgrimage to the birthsite of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

Although the following exchanges are a bit lengthy, they are

representative of the type of questions posed by Western intellectuals
/

who met Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura in the course of his preaching, and are
entirely relevant for our preachers today, who can study the masterful
presentation of Vedic culture and philosophy by Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura as the pinnacle of all human thought and potential.

Prof. Suthers: Did the worshippers of Krishna encourage the obscenity

of the engravings on many Hindu Temples?

✓ ^

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura: Those who are actual worshippers of Krishna

are never in favour of indecencies. All decency and morality are entirely

/

confined to the Lotus-Feet of Sri Krishna. The highest sense of morality
of the unadulterated soul consists in its love towards the Over-soul. And
the culmination of this pure love is found only in the devotees of
Krishna. The best of the moral rules as preached by the noble Jesus, do
not come anywhere near the principle of Amorous Love of the devotees
of Krishna for service thereof.

Prof. Suthers: Your Holiness seems to have taken a biased view in
saying that the good moral precepts of Christ come nowhere near "the
morality of amorous love of the devotees of Krishna."

s

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura: Certainly not. We claim to be greater and
better Christians than Westerners. Our judgement is not restricted only
to secular morality. The morality of the object of spiritual love
transcends the supra-natural morality, which again surpasses secular
morality. If Christian morality is perfected thereby, then it may be said
to receive proper nourishment. To a pure soul that remains situated on
that transcendentally moral plane of love, the secular moralities appear
reduced to the smallness of pygmies. But there is not found any feeling
of apathy, nor attachment towards these secular moralities. On the
other hand, all moralities wait like maids behind the spiritual moralities
to become glorified, being permitted to serve the Lord of transcendental


56



Love. The character of a culturist of spiritual love is never devoid of

morality. One hostile to morality or fallen from it can never be a

spiritual man. In the blaze of the teaching of Sri Caitanya Deva's ideal,

it has been propagated that dissoluteness is not devotion. Its palpable

evidence is found when we reflect on the character of Sri Caitanya

Deva or the followers at His Heel. The people of the realm of the secular

morality concerned with the worldly enjoyments and their renunciation

will not be able to grasp in their tiniest brains how fostered by the

climax of morality and how adored in the highest degree by all the

morality of the universe are the Amorous Sports of Krishna, so much

glorified by the noble clan of such high personages of strictly continent

/ / /

character as the devotees of Sri Caitanya Deva like Sri Rupa, Sri

/ / /

Sanatana, Sri Raghunatha Dasa, Sri Raghunatha Bhatta, Sri Gopala
Bhatta, etc.

Prof. Suthers: How can your Holiness's statements be reconciled with
the descriptions that are found about Krishna's amorous sports?

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura: Krishna's Amorous Sports are not temporal like
the lustful sports of dramatic heroes and heroines like Romeo-Juliet or
even ideal spouses. Lust as prevalent in this world is only a mental
passion, but the lust of the transcendental region has its own form. Here
lust is always goaded by the enemy (one of the six passions); whereas in
the transcendental region of Krishna, the loveliness of the spiritual Body
of Krishna ever drives the Lust for Krishna, which takes form as
sublimated love or the desire to gratify the immaculate senses of
Krishna. The conductor of the worldly lust is the enemy (passion), and
the conductor of love is Krishna. It is the Amorous Sports of Krishna
that have appropriateness; but there is no such consistency in the lust
born of the body and mind of jlva (creature). Krishna's Amorous Sports
are not to be called indecency, because it is Krishna Who is the only one
unrivalled Enjoyer, Embodiment of the Real Truth and the Spiritual
Despot.

Prof. Suthers: I cannot fully appreciate this; please let me understand it
a little more clearly.

s

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura: Suppose there are some angles, two right angles,
four right angles, etc. There is the contracted character of a corner in


57



the acute, obtuse or right angle. But in the two right angles called the
straight angle, even though called an angle, there is no contractedness or
want of straightness, as in the case with angles in general. Such is the
case with the Autocrat Krishna. There is no want or contractedness or
despicable character or indecency in the perfect Entity Krishna, like the
circle of 360 degrees, though the communities of enjoyers or renouncers,
championing morality or immorality, may, due to the meagreness of
their intellect, wrongly regard the lustfulness of Krishna, the result of
His despotism which is only His, as vulgar like that of common men and
other creatures.

[Here we see the professor becoming a bit intimidated by Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta's unexpectedly confident, mysterious, cerebral,
transcendental explanation of a subject clearly beyond his ability to
understand, so he changes the subject.]

Professor Suthers: The Gita has admitted the doctrine of the
transmigration of the soul. What does your Vaisnava philosophy say
about this?

Srila Sarasvati Thakura: The Gita is not separate from the Vaisnava

/

philosophy. In the Srlmad-Bhagavatam has been fully revealed the true
import of the doctrine, viz., that of changes of births for the soul.
Christianity has disregarded the principle of change of births on the
alleged ground that if it is accepted, men will not restrain their sinful
propensities, rather they will indulge in vices at their sweet will in their
present life, on the expectation that they will be able to make good their
sins, guilts, and wrong doing of this life in the course of the following
ones. But the Srlmad-Bhagavatam has crowned the principle with its
true significance, by means of a much fuller scientific and philosophical
meaning, by giving the instruction about the urgent necessity for
ardently taking up and culturing devotion to God even while the human
life, not easily available in the after-lives, is at our disposal, without
spending a single moment thereof in other useless pursuits. If we do not

accept the doctrine of transmigration of the soul and adopt the

/

instruction of the Srlmad-Bhagavatam, we shall not be able to get over
the all-devouring disaster of regarding matter as the sole object of our
concern, which has kept its mouth wide open.

Though most of the Christians do not admit transmigration, yet many


58



intellectual giants of the Christian world have shown several instances
of their acceptance of the doctrine. Even in the Bible we find "And as
Jesus passed by, he saw a man who was blind from his birth. And his
disciples asked him, saying, -'Master, who had committed the sin? This
man or his parents, that he was born blind? 1 " [St. John 9, 1-2] It is seen
that even some Christian Fathers clearly gave instructions about
transmigration. Origen said: "Is it not more in conformity with reason
that every soul for certain mysterious reasons is introduced into a body
and introduced according to its deserts and former actions?" [ Origen
contra celscea, I xxxii] "I am sure that I, such as you see me here, have
lived a thousand times, and I have to come again another thousand
times" says Goethe.

What the Greeks called 'Metempsychosis' or what is 'Transmigration' in
the English language, was at one time, more or less, admitted in ancient
Greece, Egypt, and many places in the west. Some say that the apostles
of Christ the Great, failing to reconcile their previous and subsequent
conclusions with the doctrine of transmigration, were compelled to
discard it. Yet no rationalist among the Christians has been able to
refute the doctrine on the basis of sound reasoning; on the other hand,
most of them have had to admit it even. Heredotus, Pindar, Plato, etc.
have all accepted it. Pluxley, the illustrious scientist of the nineteenth
century, has written in his religious work, Evolution and Ethics: "None
but very hasty thinkers will reject it on the ground of inherent
absurdity, like the doctrine of evolution itself, viz., that of
transmigration which has its root in the world of reality, and it may
claim such support as the great argument of 'analogy' is capable of
supplying."

Professor Lutoloski has said, "I cannot give up my conviction of a
previous existence on earth before my birth, and I have the certainty to
be born again after my death, until I have assimilated all human
experiences, having been many times male and female, wealthy and
poor, free and enslaved, generally having experienced all conditions of
human existence." But such transmigration theories of the empiricists of
the west or those of the western philosophers of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries like Franciscus Mercurius Helmont, Leichtenburg,
Lessing, Herder, Schopenhauer, etc. or of Jalaluddin Rumi of the Sufi


59



sect of Persia, or of the Theosophists, or of the Indian Nyaya philosophy
under the aphorism: " From the desire for the mother's breast milk due
to the habit of the previous life," or of the Buddhistic doctrine of
annihilation in matter-these are assailable by various hostile reasonings

and having their origin in inductive concepts are incomplete and

/

imperfect. But the conclusion in this respect of the Srimad-Bhagavatam
is fully flawless and significant. The Vaisnava philosophy having shown
the royal road to the acquirement of the highest blessedness even in the
present life, there is no need of waiting for future lives. As such, the
Vaisnava philosophy is thoroughly aloof from all wrangling full of
useless riddles over the doctrine of transmigration.

[Now we will see that the professor, after prolonged exposure to Srila

Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, is beginning to realize the deary a' s

clear superiority on all fronts: intellectual, scholarship and spiritual

realization. Still, though now more respectful, he clings to his Christian

chauvinism, which is evident from the next question.]

Professor Suthers: I am able to feel the super-excellence of the

Vaisnava philosophy among the Indian Philosophies. But to my mind,

the acceptance of idolatry in the Vaisnava philosophy like the other

Indian philosophies seems to be a stigma in it.

/

Srila Sarasvatl Thakura: Idolatry has never been accepted in the
Vaisnava philosophy; on the other hand, it has been more or less
accepted in the other philosophies, at least mentally, if not in so many
words. In the very word 'Bhagavan' (God) have accumulated all the
excellences that are there in the human and supra-human conceptions.
The existence of Majesty, viz., the furthermost limits of both vastness
and minuteness, is a characteristic of God. The second characteristic is
His Omnipotence. If one understands the word 'omnipotence' to mean
what is conceivable by the human intellect or what is possible for man,
one is wrong. God is Omnipotent, because what is impossible according
to the human intellect is within the ambit of the inscrutable power of
God. Due to His inscrutable power, He is simultaneously both with and
without Form. It will be the denial of His inscrutable power, if you say
that He cannot have His Form, or He has not his Eternal Form, only
having a Form for the time being, none in the end. By dint of his


60



inscrutable power, He is with His Eternal Sportive Form before a
liberated soul conversant with the service of His Potencies.
Contemplation only on formlessness is rather unnatural and devoid of
all differential excellence. God is always All-Good, All-Glory and All-
Beauty. His Beauty is visible only to the transcendental eye. God is the
Transcendental Reality, Pure, Full and sentient in essence and Sentient
Essence is His Form.

It is true that God has no material body, but He has His Sat (eternal),

Cit (all-Sentient), A nanda (all-Blissful), Transcendental Body visible
only to the eye that is clear (devoid of matter). To the material eye, God
is Formless, but to the transcendental eye He is with His Body of C it or
All-Sentience. The M urtis (forms of body) prepared and worshipped by
those who have not seen this Cit-Body of God with their true and
eternal eye cleansed with the collyrium of the Fove of God are of course
idols and all the worshippers of those idols must be idolators. The
worship of murtis of God prepared from imagination may be called
idolatry. Suppose I, who have not seen Jacob, make a murti of his out of
imagination, this murti is not the replica of his form. Besides, if Jacob is a
creature of this world, whose body, mind and soul are different from one
another, his photograph being only the replica of his material body is
different from his eternal and intrinsically true form. But God with His
Sat-cit-ananda Body is not such a thing; His Body and Soul are not
different from each other; nor are his Name and Soul, His Attribute and
Figure, His Attribute and Soul, His Sport and Soul, His Sport and
Figure, His Sport and Attribute, different. If a pure entity or unmixed
soul sees that Eternal Form of God and receives It in his own pure
receptacle and then places this Transcendental Form in the world from
his heart as illuming the intrinsically and essentially true Form of God,
that never deserves to be called an idol. Just as even by coming down to
this phenomenal world, God remains untouched by the influence of
maya by dint of His inscrutable power, so does His true Form, too, as
revealed to the unmixed entity of His devotee, remain above it even

though brought down here. For this reason the Vaisnava philosophy

/

terms Sri-murti as His A rcavatara' (Worshipable Descent). The
conception of God without Form in contra-distinction to His Essential
Form is as calamitous as is the falsely imagined Form of God for one


61



competent to see His True Form. Such insignificant processes occur
before attaining to the Real Entity and do only grope in the darkness.
The SrI-Vigraha of the Vaisnava philosophy cannot but be the direct
indication of the Essential Form of God. By way of an imperfect
comparison it may be said to be the proxy of the essential Form of God
which is beyond the cognisance of the material eye, just as there are, in
art and science, crude representations of invisible matter.

How can those, that have not in their heart Love of God which is the
true function of the soul and is the science of the true knowledge of
realities, think of the Sri-murtis ( Sri-Vigrahas ) as other than idols? The
deliberations of the Vaisnava philosophy are very fine. These have
shown by true scientific analysis that they are all, more or less, idolaters
who declare themselves as partisans either of the doctrine of no Form of
God or that of His material Form. Just as those who attribute God-ship
to matter and worship it like the fire worshippers among the uncivilised
people or the worshippers of the planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn, etc., of
Greece, are crude idolaters, in a similar manner the others, who declare
everything beyond matter as formless, and become exponents of the
doctrine of non-distinction, are equal or even greater idolaters. The
Henotheists or worshippers of one of the Vedic deities or the
worshippers of the five deities (called Panchopasakas ) worship imaginary
icons, considering them as God. According to them, God has no Sat-Cit-
A nanda-Vigraha, and as without some form there can be no subject for
contemplation, to make it easy to meditate on Him, some form has got
be imagined. They are all idolaters. So also is the conduct of some of the
yogis and others to be regarded as idolatry, who, for purifying their heart
or improving the functions of the mind, imagine a God and perform
practices of contemplation, etc., of some imaginary form of His. Those
who consider jlvas as God are the most blasphemous idolaters, because to
imagine any worldly thing or form as God is idolatry.

There is a world of difference between the worship of Sri-murtis as
ordained by the Vaisnava philosophy and the doctrines of God with
Form and without Form of the other thinkers. Mahaprabhu Sri Caitanya
Deva has refuted all sorts of idolatry and instructed the service of the
A rcavataras of the All-merciful God of Inscrutable Potency.

Professor Suthers: (amazed) I have truly been astonished to hear from


62



your Holiness these mysteries of the Vaisnava philosophy and their
scientific analysis with the most reasonable arguments. I could not even
think before that there are in the Vaisnava philosophy such excellent
solution, corroboration and elucidation of the problems of Indian
philosophy.

[There is one other exchange, though as usual, decidedly one-sided,
when the professor in the earlier stages of the discussion foolishly tries
to challenge and even decry the idea of God as a fish, boar, etc. I include
Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's rather long tour-de-force on
the avatar as of God, spiritual evolution of serving mood, etc. just to give
some idea of the superhuman genius of an eternally liberated soul, who
has, bear in mind, responded quite spontaneously to the question,
obviously (to any reasonable person) from a totally realized and
empowered platform.]

Professor Suthers: In the scriptures of India, adorable Deities have been

represented as creatures of the lower creation like fish, tortoise, boar,

etc. Is this approved by the sense of decency of civilised humanity? Some

again are in favour of supporting such representations as allegorical

symbols.

✓

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura: Imagination does not find a place in Vaisnava

/

philosophy. In it, or in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is the highest
scripture for all men in the universe, has been described the topmost
ontology about God, millions of times better than what the most
civilized races of humanity five thousand years old, nay, as old as several
millions of eras, can conceive of even in imagination. The eternal
transcendental forms of God that descend or are manifested according
to the gradual evolution of the aptitude for offering service by the
totally purified soul quite aloof from the regions of the body and mind,
when man becomes the worshipper of the ultimate Reality at the loftiest
stage of civilisation, are never the idols of imagination or allegories like
unreal things manufactured in the mental factory of man or like
imaginary animal deities of the barbarians such as the tiger-god, serpent-
god, horse-god, etc. The worship of the Visnu Incarnations like Fish,
Turtle, etc., is not fabrication of imagination like that of one of the five
deities of the Henotheists formed out of imagination, based on the
coinage of set speeches like the imaginary conception of the forms of


63



Brahman (as in the Panchadasl of the monistic school). The Henotheists
do not admit the Transcendental Personality of Godhead. The sects of
figurative allegorists like the Theosophists are not real theists,
cherishing, as they do, doubt against the Personality of God and as such,
not having faith in realistic truth, and for that reason they want to
curtail God's Omni-potentiality and His Transcendental Names,
Appearances, Attributes, Sports by means of allegorical descriptions.

The Vaisnava philosophy (or that of the ever-existent religion of India)
has never supported the atheistic doctrines of such professors of
imaginary forms of Brahman, or figurative allegorists. It is about the
doctrine of pure and real A vatara-vada (cult of Incarnation) that the
philosophy of the ever-existing Indian religion has said. As the pure and
real doctrine of Avataras of Fish, Turtle, etc. of the Vaisnavas is not a
kind of imagination of the barbarian taste, nor the idolatry of the
Mayavadlns on the basis of their aphorism of forms of Brahman,
imagined for the convenience of practicants, nor the allegorical
descriptions of the psychists, so it is not the Anthropomorphism (i.e.
representation of the deity as having human forms), as devised by the so-
called civilised section of the people, nor Therianthropism (i.e.
representation of one's tutelary deity in a combined man-and-beast
form), nor even Apotheosis (i.e. elevating man to the dignity of deities).
These are respective types of the idolatry of the mental speculationists
of the inductive school. In imitation of M ayavada, the evil fruit of the
Indian civilisation, Anthropomorphism was invented in Greece and
Rome and Therianthropism in Egypt, etc. When the new doctrines got
access in those countries along with the commodities produced by the
Indian civilization which were based on the imagination of the
anthrophysites like the Indian Mayavadlns who exalted man or beasts to
the status of God with the attribution of divinity to them calling jlvas
and the poor as 'Narayana' with gratification of the senses in the
background, then the mental speculationists of those respective
countries adopted the cheap, vitiated Indian dogmas, and, labelling new
names on them, passed these doctrinal commodities into the forum of
religious tenets. But the true Vaisnava philosophy of India never
indulged in any such doctrine based on imagination. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has refuted all such imaginative doctrines or idolatries and


64



rejected both Anthropomorphism and Therianthropism. He vouchsafed
the Sastric teaching, viz., that he must be a heretic and sinner who looks
upon God, Narayana, as equal to deities like Brahma, etc.

[Here we see the perceptive A carya readily understanding the
misconceptions accumulated by the American professor in his studies of
comparative religions, thinking that the avataras of Visnu were either to
be understood allegorically or as being part of a pagan Indian past.

Again, this is the climate produced by the Indological researches of the
British and German scholars. So Srila Sarasvatl Thakura is carefully
enumerating and discounting any type of allegorical, anthropomorphic,
therianthropic, etc. interpretation in relation to the avataras of Visnu.

He mentions some of the bogus ideas of Western theorists: the
Theosophical Society which considered the stories to be symbolic and
not real, the Henotheists, who believe in one God, but who is ultimately
impersonal, and he ultimately lays the blame for all these foolish
conceptions at the door of the Mayavadls, whose philosophy he calls the
"evil fruit of the Indian civilisation" who call ordinary animals and men
"Narayana" and the real background interest of its followers as
"gratification of the senses". He then describes this A vatara-vada (cult of
incarnation) as the "philosophy of the ever-existing Indian religion".

This was indeed a surprise for the good professor! Srila Sarasvatl
Thakura continues:]

Srila Sarasvatl Thakura: Anthropomorphism, i.e., representation of the
Deity with human form and attributes, resembles the tenet of the Bauls
of Bengal attributing divinity to the head of their sect, professing, as
they do, though wrongly, to have preceptorially descended from Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Such tenets are the mental imaginations of
atheists like the Bouddhas [followers of Buddha-ed.] and of the Bauls as
above, running contrary to the teachings of Sri Buddha-Visnu and Sri

Caitanya-Visnu respectively. The Mayavadl sect too has adopted similar

/

principles. The really scientific philosophy of the Srimad-Bhagavatam
and the preachings of Sri Caitanya Deva have, of course, accepted the
human body as the Divine Manifestation [S.B. 3.2.12]; but that human
body is not the creation of anthropomorphism, nor of the Baul doctrine,
but it is the eternal Sat-cit-ananda Body, the Cause of all causes, the
highest Sportive Entity. When the human soul can acquire the wealth of


65



all the sciences in perfection, then only is opened the door of the
foremost mystery of true science. According to the Vaisnava philosophy,
the Sportive Manifestation of God is of two kinds. One kind is the
creation of the material and spiritual universe and its systematization
with inviolable rules. The school of intelligent empiricists can to a
certain extent experience this type of God's Sportive Manifestation. The
second kind is the descent of God's Transcendental Sport in this created
universe. It is the jivas who are the attendants in His Sports. They
become attached to matter having deviated from their own essential
nature as the result of their desire for enjoyment. But when again the
soul of jlva, gains true wisdom of the transcendental region of God at the
feet of a representative of His, he begins to get back his pure essential
nature gradually unfolded, and God's Transcendental, Eternal Forms
appear as the objects of his worship according to the comprehension of
His service in the graded evolution of acceptance of His protection, self-
surrender or theism. So in such a case there remains no room, even in
the slightest degree, for any form of imaginative doctrines of the so-
called civilised or uncivilised human minds, whether apotheosistic,
anthropomorphic, henotheistic, theriomorphic or therianthropic. The
real, eternal and transcendental Divine Forms reveal themselves to the
pure souls according to the nature of their serving mood in the
evolutionary growth thereof. The only cause of these Divine Descents is
the intense Mercy of God towards jivas. In Europe the theories of
physical evolution of Darwin and Eamarck have been considered. But it
is in the Vaisnava philosophy alone that we see the fully scientific and
real conception of each eternal and transcendental Divine Form for
worship by the freed souls according to their evolutionary growth of
serving mood.

[Here, Srila Sarasvatl Thakura shows his ready awareness of the
evolutionary theories of Darwin and Eamarck, but explains that real
evolution of the jlva is in the growth of his serving mood to the Ford. He
now proceeds to further describe how there are ten different stages of
animal life described by the sages of India, and that these may be called
the "historical stages of jivas". He then further analyzes that the ten
incarnations of God indicate these different stages of jivas in the
evolution of their serving mood. In other words, the Ford appears to


66



attract the conditioned souls to His worship by appearing in all the
various stages of animate beings which the conditioned souls have
experienced in their thousands of births, and He does so, being aware of
the various kinds of serving moods they have developed which will cause
them to be attracted to one of these forms. This will be described in his
next amazing remarks.]

s

Srlla Sarasvati Thakura: We can notice the different stages of animal
life from the invertebrates to the fully grown human beings. These
stages have been classified by the Indian sages of a scientific outlook in
ten orders, viz. (1) the invertebrate, (2) testaceous or shelly, (3)
vertebrate, (4) erectly vertebrate (as in the combined form of man and
beast), (5) mannikin (dwarf), (6) barbaric, (7) civilised, (8) wise, (9)
ultra-wise, (10) destructive. These are the historical stages of jivas.
According to the gradation of these stages as indications of evolution of
the serving mood of the jlva soul, there are manifested the ten
Incarnations of God, viz. Matsya (fish), Kurma (turtle), Varaha (boar),
Nrsimha (man-Lion), Vamana (dwarf), Parasurama, Rama, Krishna,
Buddha and Kalki, as worshippable Deities with eternal transcendental
Names, Forms, Attributes and Sports. Those, who have acquired a true
knowledge about Incarnations with a thorough culture thereof, will be
able, with the grace of the philosophers trained in the school of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to appreciate the ontology of Sri Krishna,
specially the intense sweetness of His Sports at Braja (i.e. Vrindavana
and the neighbourhood).

Professor Suthers: (obviously trying to grasp what he'd just heard) I have
just listened to many subtle truths in the science and philosophy of
religion. Please let me have a conception of these intricate matters.

[The professor had himself undergone an "evolution" from skeptical and
challenging to amazed, impressed, even awed. Practically, he is inquiring
at this point like a student. Now see how Srlla Sarasvati Thakura, the
consummate pure preacher, seeing the professor as a conditioned soul
needing to be illumined, uncompromisingly does not spare him the truth
regarding the price of such illumination.]

Srlla Sarasvati Thakura: The essential principle of Vaishnavism is that,
how-so-ever great a scholar and intellectual giant a man may be, he will
not be able to appreciate even the easiest points of the Vaisnava


67



philosophy, until and unless he has entirely surrendered himself to an

A carya whose character is the embodiment of the Vaisnava philosophy.

You must have heard about the Indian scripture named Gita, which has

been translated into different languages of the civilised world. There is a

sloka in it [4.34] which says that the Vaisnava philosophy is

understandable only with unconditional surrender, honest enquiry and

serving temper. It is only to such an approach the professors of Vaisnava

philosophy with these three as the preceptorial fee, that they give

instructions about the correct philosophical truths. These professors are

never to be tempted by any type of worldly fees.

[The professor was unprepared for full surrender though, so again he

changed the subject. However by the end of the interview, he was most

/

humble and impressed and told Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl

Thakura, "I do not know how fortunate I am to have met your Holiness

and got spiritually enlightened in this manner." He then traveled to see

Lord Caitanya's birthplace, and when leaving India he spoke to many

/

friends about the incomparability of Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's

contribution. These excerpts serve to underscore the wonderful

/

scholarship, brilliance and transcendental ingenuity of Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura as a preacher of the highest
philosophy known to mankind. No wonder that the initially proud
professor was so flabbergasted by the end of the interview.]


Triumph Of The Gaudiya Math


The following years marked an unparalleled rise in the activities of the

Gaudiya Math, throughout India and beyond. In the scope of this book it

is possible to note only the high-points of these efforts.

/ __

In 1929 Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura began a program to glorify the holy

/

places sanctified by the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by
establishing 108 pada-pltha memorials of the footprints of the Lord in
various places where He traveled and preached. He established one such
pada-pltha at Kanai and one at Mandar. In Benares, while installing a


68




/

pada-pitha, he also gave a lecture on the instructions of Sri Caitanya
/

Mahaprabhu to Srlla Sanatana GosvamI on the site of the actual spot
where those talks were held.

In January of 1930 Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura installed Deities of Radha
and Govinda at the Triveni on the occasion of the Purna Kumbha-mela
and he sent out his team of preachers in the area to enlighten people.

His preaching work was increasingly more organized. His teams would
canvass from door to door, asking for contributions, selling subscriptions
to their magazines, starting centers, making devotees, etc. Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura was making lecture tours, talking with intellectuals and
scholars of the day, presiding over installations of Deities, initiations
and festivals organized for diorama exhibitions, temple openings,
prasadam distribution, etc. Meanwhile, his presses were rolling,
producing books. He was even meeting with the English governors,
viceroys, Indian kings, etc. and encouraging them to assist in the
opening of his temples and projects. Of course this was frowned upon by
some of the nationalists and religious purists, but Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura was far removed from the bodily concept of life; his idea was to
involve and purify everyone in the flood of the sanklrtana movement of

s

Sr! Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

In February of 1930 a tremendous diorama exhibition called the
Sreedham Mayapur Navadwip Exhibition was opened in that holy site,
which contained many stalls exhibiting the stories and lessons from the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. It created a sensation, thousands flocked to see it,
and it remained open for a month and a half.

/

On October of 1930 there was a magnificent installation ceremony of Sri
Radha Madana-mohana, Radha Govinda and Radha Goplnatha at the
Gaudlya Math in Baghbazar, Calcutta. A palatial marble temple had

been constructed with the help of a wealthy Vaisnava merchant. This

/

was Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's practical exhibition of the principle of
yukta-vairagya: to utilize the material energy for Krsna's purposes.
Although previously Vaisnavas tended to avoid the cities and live in
seclusion, Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's idea was to have his sannyasi and
brahmacarl preachers go to the cities and establish temples and tend to
the spiritual welfare of the masses. Thus, the small beginnings in
Calcutta at No. 1 Ultadanga Junction Road had culminated in a


69



magnificent temple with a conference hall for discourses, many rooms, a
library, press, etc. Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's ideas were considered
revolutionary: sannyasls riding in motor cars, wearing sewn cloth, buying
the most modern printing presses, staging huge exhibitions with
dioramas illustrating the profound philosophy of Srimad-Bhagavatam
and Caitanya-caritdmrta. Nothing like it had ever been attempted
before. Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura had laid the groundwork by reviving
interest in Vaisnava thought, establishing its credibility and
respectability, publishing the books of the Gosvamls of Vrndavana, and
also creating his own brilliant transcendental storehouse of Vaisnava
literature, poetry, songs and deep philosophical tracts. Now Sarasvatl
Thakura was distributing it, publicizing it, writing books, and creating a
sensation. His activities were that of an empowered preacher. He
preached to the intellectuals all over India, had exhibitions, established
many temples, established pada-plthas, wrote many books, published
magazines, held huge festivals, re-established holy places, installed
Deities, etc. He burned with the desire to fulfill Lord Caitanya's mission,
to spread Krsna consciousness all over the earth.

By year's end he had preached in Jajpur, Kurmaksetra, Simhachal, and
Kovvur, the site of the meeting and discussion between Ramananda
Raya and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In 1931 a school was opened in
Mayapur-the Thakur Bhaktivinode Institute. At that time it was the
only English medium high school based on spiritual instruction. Srlla
Sarasvatl Thakura delivered a lecture called A para and Para Vidya
(Material and Spiritual Education) at the opening. Deities were
established in Alalanath, where years earlier he had entered the trance
of ecstasy and become lost in the forest. He also established Deities in
New Delhi, the capital of India and the former capital of the Pandavas.
He spoke to many scholars like Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld from Germany,
Dr. Stella Kramrisch, another German scholar who taught in Calcutta
University, and Mr. A. J. Jacob from America. To all he taught the
importance of hearing the transcendental sound from a transcendental
agent:

"The transcendental Sound has got innumerable potencies. It has power
of delegating power to us to receive all of it. When it comes from an
unknown region it should first inject such power to our feeble receiving


70



instrument as would enable us to welcome it. We must not show a
challenging or rejecting attitude as we are liable to do towards advice
offered gratis.

"If we are fortunate to receive the Sound that is beyond the human
scope we should listen to it. God-head sends down His messengers in
symbolised figures to give us, if we are at all really sanguine, ideas of the
Absolute. It is only then that we would be enabled to make any progress.
This fortune is denied to all who have love for transformable things.

"We must not neglect the transcendental Sound freely transmitted by
the agents of the Absolute. We find ourselves interested in many things
that are not known to us. The doctors do not know the remedies of
many diseases. We require no monetary value in exchange for
transmitting our message. We live a simple life and require little help
from others in the way of scientific facilities. As we have got our ear we
can receive transcendental Sound and vocalise the same to any
intelligent person who may hear us.

"This will not be accessible to persons who have very little culture, who
are engrossed in sensuous engagements. But we expect the intelligent
section to make some preparatory progress toward a region of which we
are essentially in need. In these days of materialism we are no doubt
puzzled by these high thoughts. We are trying to do much to enrich the
human intellect. But we are startled when we are told to look beyond.
This is silly.

"We want to rouse up the true mentality of the civilized world for
seeking true help towards spiritual progress. The secular help cannot
appease our inner hunger. The transcendental Help can. We intelligent
people should receive this transcendental Sound. We are now vitally
concerned in this as every one is engaged in exploring ways and means
for getting rid of our present unbearable inadequacies. We should spare
a portion of our time to receive those Sounds."

[Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura shows how much aware he
is of the foolish mode of thinking of contemporary society by such
phrases as "In these days of materialism we are no doubt puzzled by these
high thoughts. We (meaning human society) are trying to do much to
enrich the human intellect. But we are startled when we are told to look
beyond. This is silly." But he also compassionately notes, "...everyone is


71



engaged in exploring ways and means for getting rid of our present
unbearable inadequacies." Then he notes the eternal solution to what is
really the eternal problem of conditional existence: "We should spare a
portion of our time to receive those Sounds. "(transcendental sounds
from a liberated soul.)]

In November of 1931 Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura sent
the preachers from his Delhi Math with a spiritual message to the then
Viceroy of India, Lord Willingdon. Srlla Sarasvatl later delivered some
lectures in Delhi in the latter part of that year and glorified the Srimad-
Bhagavatam at Sukaratala, the place where Sukadeva GosvamI delivered
the Bhagavatam to Maharaja Parlksit 5,000 years earlier.

In 1932 Deities were installed in Madras, and many well-attended
discourses were held in the area. In Mayapur he initiated a series of
examinations for the titles of Bhakti Sastri and A carya (in ten subject
areas): 1. Sruti (Vedas) 2. Vedanta 3. Bhagavata 4. Ekayana Pancaratra 5.
Literature 6. History 7. Sampradaya Vibhava 8. Bhakd-sastra 9.
Philosophy 10. Rasa. Disciples were expected to at least try to achieve a
Bhakti Sastri degree, and those who were to become expert priests and
preachers would study puja, Vedanta , philosophy, etc. for higher degrees.
We may note that Srlla Prabhupada also wanted a system of degree
courses devised for the study of his books, including higher degrees for
advanced studies in Srimad-Bhagavatam and Caitanya-caritamrta.

In May of 1932 he revised and corrected a scholarly English presentation

/

on the life of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called Sree Krishna Chaitanya,
which was composed by one of his disciples who was a professor at
Ravenshaw College named Dr. Nishi Kanta Sanyal. The work was done
in a very thorough way compiling the pastimes of the Lord from all the
prominent biographies of the Lord written by his immediate followers,
especially the Caitanya Bhagavata and Caitanya-caritamrta. Professor
Sanyal also was the editor of the English Harmonist of Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura, and being pleased with this effort, the acarya wrote a
wonderful introduction to the volume printed in Madras, noting: "The
writer has got the prime object of furnishing a comparative study in
which the position of a reader has the highest place. This is his only
ambition, of healing the depraved mentality of the so-called culturists of


72



True Knowledge. But the readers have different motives of utilising the
product of their enterprise of perusing the book. One class of readers are
found to criticise the merits and demerits of the writer in order to
establish their superiority, with a view to puff up their vanity. Another
class is observed to muse over the subject by spending their time for the
gratification of their senses. The third section of readers mean to profit
by reading the book in order to regulate their life for a better purpose.
The under-estimation of a desirable element for some utilisation
through temporal gratification of the senses, would not equipoise the
third position of the reader who will surely mark the distinctive
situation by comparing other things and agree with the author in
spending his valuable time for true amelioration."

[Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura warns the audience of
intellectuals to whom this book has been addressed not to commit the
errors of trying to fault the author on some intellectual or literary basis
to establish their own superiority or to try to examine the contents with
a view to gratify their senses with some story. He delineates the proper
approach as "reading the book in order to regulate their life for a better
purpose" and thereby "healing the depraved mentality of the so-called
culturists of True Knowledge." Certainly this is the "chopping
technique" of the pure sadhu at work. Right from the start he addresses
the intellectuals of his day and warns them not to drag any material
preconceptions to the region of the Absolute Truth. He continues:]

"The body of the book will appear before readers as a historical account
of the Journey of life of a Hero. But the Hero is not an ordinary
mundane hero for a hallucinative ambition with a spiritual tinge. The
account will no doubt show that the targetted Object of the manifestive
spiritual world is Eternal and identical with the Hero of the speaker.
Hasty conclusions will be pouring forth to oppose this by welcoming
anthropomorphic and apotheotic thoughts. The delineations will prove
that the Object pointed to is beyond the comprehension of crippled
senses. And the Absolute Eternity made up of Pure Knowledge and
Incessant Bliss is never to be had within the compass of our senses. All
objects of the phenomena which are comprehended by senses have
temporal situation and deformed entity void of different 'qualities' that
are always submissive to senses." [In other words, Lord Caitanya's


73



activities are of the spiritual world and cannot be comprehended by
sensory or intellectual inspection, because He is the Supreme Lord
Himself.]

At the same time he was editing Professor Sanyal's book, he also checked
the proofs of his English presentation of Brahma-samhita with Sanskrit
commentary by Srila Jlva GosvamI, a book discovered by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in His travels, which perfectly elucidated His teachings
about Krsna. When Lord Caitanya visited the temple of Adi-kesava in
South India on the bank of the PayasvinI River, He discussed some
spiritual topics with highly advanced devotees there, and while there He
found a chapter of Brahma- samhita. (Actually the book was originally
much longer but the Fifth Chapter was all that remained.) This incident
is described in the Caitanya-caritamrta, M adhya-llla, Chapter 9, by His
Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, as follows:

"Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was greatly happy to find a chapter of that
scripture, and symptoms of ecstatic transformation-trembling, tears,
perspiration, trance and jubilation-were manifest in His body. There is no
scripture equal to the Brahma-samhita as far as the final spiritual conclusion
is concerned. Indeed, that scripture is the supreme revelation of the glories of
Lord Govinda, for it reveals the topmost knowledge about Him. Since all
conclusions are briefly presented in Brahma-samhita, it is essential among all
the Vaisnava literatures." (texts 238-240)

Purport: "The Brahma-samhita is a very important scripture. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu acquired the Fifth Chapter from the Adi-kesava temple. In that
Fifth Chapter, the philosophical conclusion of acintya-bhedabheda-tattva
(simultaneous oneness and difference) is presented. The chapter also presents
methods of devotional service, the eighteen-syllable Vedic hymn, discourses
on the soul, the Supersoul and fruitive activity, an explanation of kama-
gayatrl, kama-blja and the original Maha-Visnu, and a specific description of
the spiritual world, specifically Goloka Vrndavana. Brahma-samhita also
explains the demigod Ganesa, the Garbhodakasay! Visnu, the origin of the
Gayatr! mantra, the form of Govinda and His transcendental position and
abode, the living entities, the highest goal, the goddess Durga, the meaning of
austerity, the five gross elements, love of Godhead, impersonal Brahman, the
initiation of Lord Brahma, and the vision of transcendental love enabling one
to see the Lord. The steps of devotional service are also explained. The mind,
yoga-nidra, the goddess of fortune, devotional service in spontaneous ecstasy,
incarnations beginning with Lord Ramacandra, Deities, the conditioned soul
and its duties, the truth about Lord Visnu, prayers, Vedic hymns, Lord Siva,


74



Vedic literature, personalism and impersonalism, good behavior and many
other subjects are also discussed. There is also a description of the sun and the
universal forms of the Lord. All these subjects are conclusively explained in a
nut-shell in this Brahma-samhita."

In the same 9th Chapter of Madhya-lila Lord Caitanya presented
Brahma-samhita and Krsna-karnamrta to Ramananda Raya and told
him, "Whatever you have told Me about devotional service is all
supported by these two books." From this we can see the importance
Lord Caitanya gave to this scripture, and it is further explained that He
personally copied it down with His own hand. Later Ramananda Raya
made a copy, and in this way it was passed on until Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura published it on a large scale for the
first time.

During this period Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura completed
his Gaudiya Bhasya commentary on the Caitanya-bhagavata and wrote a
short English biography called Rai Ramananda , an account of the life of
Srlla Ramananda Raya. The latter work, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta divided
into two parts. The first part, "The Lord and His Beloved" (Viewed By
Empiricists), he describes as: "... a short Narrative of the Supreme Lord
and Rai Ramananda as gauged by mundane spectators known as
hagiolaters who search about the accounts of heroes." This first section
almost humorously accounts for Ramananda Raya and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in a manner suitable for speculative scholars and
historians. The second section is called "The Lord and His Beloved"
(Viewed by Devotees), which he addresses to those in his audience
whom he clearly takes more seriously. On the first page of that chapter
he writes, "We have surveyed in the last chapter the seeming conception
of worldly people about Rai Ramananda. Now we are to enlighten those
who are interested in the esoteric aspect of the devotee. Savants of the
spiritual manifestations do not corroborate the view of the ordinary
observer of mundane phenomena. Conception is carried both in worldly
phenomena as well as Transcendental Manifestive Aspects. A stricter
caution may not be neglected in distinguishing the two different planes
so as to rescue the true view from confusion."

[Here we see Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's often-repeated
theme that the "materialistic demeanour cannot possibly stretch to the


75



Transcendental Autocrat." There are two distinct planes of existence-
that of the exoteric material appearances, which tell us something about
spiritual personages (but not much), and the esoteric spiritual plane
which reveals the essence and which is vastly more important and of
permanent significance. This small book is a wonderful display of just
how true this principle is. Nothing of Raya Ramananda's true character
can be comprehended by an external view of biographical facts and
figures. The only entry into his true glories was by a transcendental
agent like Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura.]

In June of 1932 he visited the Maharaja of Mysore and stayed as a guest
in his Ramya Palace where he delivered a series of discourses about Lord
Caitanya's philosophy. He then preached in Bangalore and then
travelled to Kovvur where he installed Deities near the transcendental
site of the conversations between Lord Caitanya and Ramananda Raya.
In October and November of 1932 the circumambulation of Vraja
Mandala was held, accompanied by many thousands of pilgrims. Srila
Sarasvatl Thakura toured all of the sacred places of Krsna's pastimes and
engaged constantly in chanting the name and glories of the Lord on the
actual sites of the Lord's pastimes. The pilgrimage required massive
organization with many tents, a moving kitchen, stage equipment,
animals, etc. The pilgrims would rise early, chant and proceed in a huge
procession with kirtana accompanying the Deity of Lord Caitanya, a
police band, a lead horse, flag bearers and all of the followers. At night a
city of tents would be erected, kirtana and discourse areas would be set
up, along with the kitchen, and there was even a system of guards for the
tents.

However, the pilgrimage encountered opposition in the form of the
Vrndavana temple proprietors, the caste gosvamis, who objected to Srila
Sarasvatl Thakura's awarding of brahminical status to those not born in
brahmana families. Although Srila Bhaktisiddhanta had established this
practice strictly in accordance with the teachings of the Hari-bhakti-
vilasa by Srila Sanatana GosvamI, who was one of the founding fathers
of the present town of Vrndavana, still the panditas did not approve
what they considered the deviation of giving brahmana and sannyasa
initiation to members of lower castes.

In this regard, Srila Prabhupada wrote an extensive reply to


76



Acyutananda Swami in 1970 explaining some of the background of this
controversy:

"Regarding the validity of the brahminical status as we accept it, because in
the present age there is no observance of the Garbhadhana ceremony, even a
person born in a brahmana family is not considered a brahmana, he is called
dvija-bandhuor unqualified son of a brahmana. Under the circumstances, the
conclusion is that the whole population is now sudra, as it is stated kalau
sudra sambhava. So for sudras there is no initiation according to the Vedic
system, but according to the pancaratrika system initiation is offered to a
person who is inclined to take Krsna consciousness.

During my Guru Maharaj's time, even a person was coming from a brahmana
family, he was initiated according to the pancaratrika system taking him to be
a sudra. So the birthright brahmanism is not applicable at the present
moment. The sacred thread inaugurated by my Guru Maharaj according to
pancaratrika system and Hari-bhakti-vilasa by Srlla Sanatana Goswami must
continue. It does not matter whether the priestly class accepts it or not.

When my Guru Maharaj Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Goswami Prabhupada
introduced this system, it was protested even by His inner circle of God-
brothers and friends. Of course He had actually no God-brothers, but there
were many disciples of Bhaktivinode Thakura who were considered as God-
brothers who protested against this action of my Guru Maharaj, but He didn't
care for it.

"Actually one who takes to chanting Hare Krsna mantra offenselessly
immediately becomes situated transcendentally and therefore he has no need
of being initiated with sacred thread, but Guru Maharaj introduced this
sacred thread because a Vaisnava was being mistaken as belonging to the
material caste. To accept a Vaisnava in material caste system is hellish
consideration (narakl buddhi). Therefore, to save the general populace from
being offender to a Vaisnava, He persistently introduced this sacred thread
ceremony and we must follow His footsteps ... This system introduced by my
Guru Maharaj is a chance for all the members of the society, scientifically
based and applied, apart from the exploitative sentiment of birthright 'caste'
system, to become actually situated on the transcendental platform.

The panditas met with Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and
a discussion took place. Although the panditas appeared satisfied with
the talks, when the parikrama reached the seven main temples, the
doors were closed. Shopkeepers closed their shops, and some people even
threw stones at them. Finally, they reached Kosi. It was at this point of
the pilgrimage that Srlla Prabhupada met Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura,


77



having traveled from Allahabad, and he sat with rapt attention hearing
him speak for many hours. And it was at this time that Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura marked him, "He likes to hear. He
does not go away."

The pilgrimage was unprecedented in scope, almost like a moving
city. The 168 mile circumambulation took from the 9th of October to
the 11th of November. During the Radha-kunda portion of the tour a
wonderful discourse was delivered by the ecstatic preacher, the
personified energy of Sri Caitanya's mercy." Who delivers "devotional

service which is enriched with conjugal love of Radha and Krsna,

/

coming exactly in the line of revelation of Srlla Rupa Gosvaml" at the
junction of Radha and Syama Kunda on the subject of Sri Upadesamrta
by Srlla Rupa Gosvaml. A large audience of Vrajavasls and panditas were
fortunate enough to hear him speak.

At the conclusion of the parikrama, Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura proceeded
to Allahabad where he oversaw the laying of the foundation stone for
the Sree Rupa Gaudlya Math in Allahabad. Sir Malcolm Haily, the

Governor of U. P., was on hand for the occasion and personally laid the

/ /

cornerstone in Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's presence. It was there that Srlla
Prabhupada received first and second initiation from Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura, who was pleased to see him. When he was presented as a
candidate for initiation, Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura commented, "Yes, he
likes to hear. He does not go away. I have marked him. I will make him
my disciple."

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura's preaching was going on in a big way. He had
teams of sannyasis and brahmacarls constantly travelling and preaching,
distributing magazines and books, establishing centers, arranging
programs, etc. A core of 18 sannyasis were organizing things. His
propaganda attracted so many people that Subhas Chandra Bose, the
famous nationalist and a former classmate of Srlla Prabhupada's at
Scottish Churches' College, met with Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura and complained, "So many people you have captured. They are
doing nothing for nationalism." The reply: "Well, for your national
propaganda you require very strong men, but these people are very weak.
You can see, they are very skinny. So don't put your glance upon them.


78



/

Let them eat something and chant Hare Krsna." Srlla Prabhupada
commented on this incident, "In this way he avoided him." The kind of
revolution Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura had in mind could not be appreciated
by Mr. Bose.

In January of 1933 a large diorama exhibition was opened in Dacca

(presently the capital of Bangladesh, it was then a part of India). Called

/

Sat Siksha, it featured toys, dolls, etc., and Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta gave
discourses there for one month to large crowds of learned and
respectable people.


The Message Is Sent To The West


After the annual Gaura Purnima celebration and circumambulation of

s s -

Sri Navadvlpa-dhama of 1933, Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura resolved to
further expand his preaching of Krsna consciousness to Europe, in line
with the desires of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura. Inspirationally, on Lord Caitanya's Appearance Day, the thick
English volume Sree Krishna Chaitanya by his disciple Professor Sanyal
was brought out, in a beautifully bound edition.

On the 18th of March Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura gave instructions to two
of his sannyasi disciples and a third disciple in a special meeting in
Madras which served as a farewell address. The three disciples who were

s

to proceed to Europe on behalf of their Guru Maharaja were Srlpada

Bhakti Pradip Tlrtha Maharaja, a disciple of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura

/ /

and the sannyasa disciple of Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura, Srlpada Bhakti

Hriday Bon Maharaja and Sri Sambidananda Prabhu. The instructions

he gave them form a brilliant essay on the mood and behavior of a

preacher in foreign lands. As we read it, it is impossible not to meditate
/

on how Srlla Prabhupada perfectly fit the description of the ideal
preacher according to Sarasvatl Thakura's description. The talk entitled
L'Envoi (which means one who is dispatched on a mission, a messenger)

s

was later published as an essay in the collected English writings of Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura.


79




"The happy day has come when we are destined to spread the message of
our Great Master [Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu] to distant corners of the
earth. The spiritual service to which we are dedicated has now passed

the bud-stage and blown fully into a flower whose aroma we have to

/

carry across the seas with that willingness which characterised Sri

Hanuman when he leapt over the wide ocean with the message of Sri

/

Rama. This extension of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's spiritual gift to
foreign countries is our humble offering at His Feet...

"The Words of instruction of Sri Gaurasundara are verily His beautiful
body; the preachers of His Word through the ages are His secondary
limbs; the teaching of Sri Gaurasundara is His potent weapon; and the
Grace of Sri Hari Himself established in the Word of Sri Caitanya, is
His eternal associate. Therefore, for the purpose of truly presenting Sri
Gaurasundara, the Lord of the Gaudlya, to the aliens, I am addressing
these few words of mine to the preachers who are about to proceed to
countries beyond India."

[This was very revolutionary. Traditionally, sannyasls never journeyed
across the ocean or rode on conveyances of any sort, as it was considered
a type of sense gratification for a true renunciate. However, the
consideration here was to deliver the message of Mahaprabhu for the
salvation of the suffering world.]

"We find the following great precepts (M ahavakya) in the body of the
Teaching that has been vouchsafed to us by the Supreme Master of all
Masters: 'To chant constantly the discourse of Hari by being (1)
extremely more humble than the blade of grass, (2) by being as
forbearing as the tree, (3) by seeking no honour for oneself and (4) by
offering due honour to all entities, is the highest natural function of the
unalloyed individual souls (jivas).' The lotus-feet of my Sri Guru-deva
attracted me to his service by his manifestation as the living
embodiment of these four great precepts. My friends will be in a position
to attract all souls of the world to the foot-stool of the Real Truth by
purchasing the same unfailing method.

[Note that Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura is herein exhibiting
his humility by referring to his disciples as "his friends".]

"The crest-jewel of the order of the Sannyasis of the triple-staff, Srlla
Prabodhananda Sarasvatl Gosvamlpada, has taught the same process to


80



those who assume the triple-staff of renunciation, in the following
words: 'I say this by holding the straw between my teeth, by falling at
your feet and uttering hundreds of the humblest entreaties: All ye good

souls, by throwing off everything to a distance, practice love to the Feet

/

of Sri Caitanya Who is so surpassingly Beautiful.' Following in the foot-
steps of all the former devotees I am making my submission to them to

pursue the identical method of propaganda.

/

"Sri Krsna Caitanya Deva is the Supreme Teacher of all teachers of this
world and the ideal possessor of intelligence that is the highest of all. It
should be our only duty to constantly chant those words regarding the
cleansing of the mirror of the heart of which He speaks in His Eight
Precepts (Shikshastakam). We are only the bearers of the
Transcendental Word. We shall never in any way hesitate to offer every
honour and facility, for which they are eligible, to all persons of this
world. We must pray to all for the boon of aptitude for the service of
Krsna. We shall come across many persons in this world, possessing an
endless variety of characters, disposed or hostile to the service of Krsna.
But we should not slacken in our loving service of the Lord of our hearts
and should offer due honour to all persons.

"We will have opportunities, as we approach different persons in all
parts of the world with the vendor's bag of the discourse of Hari, to see a
good many sights, to hear much and to seek to derive much benefit from
our experience. May we never forget that all entities of this world are
essentially proteges of the Lotus-feet of Sri Guru for helping the
expansion of His service. May we always remember that they are
excellent only if they are prepared to wait with the utmost eagerness on
the particle of dust of the lotus-feet of my Sri Guru and that otherwise
they are merely the mirage devised by the deluding potency for our ruin.
I wish to remind those friends of mine who are proceeding to the west
for preaching the words of Sri Caitanya, the two precepts of my Master

s _____

Sri Rupa: (1) 'The constant endeavour for cultivating relationship with
Krsna of a person who, being free from all mundane affinity, enjoys the
entities of this world, having due regard to the propriety of each case, in
pursuance of his purpose, is called the proper kind of renunciation.' (2)
'The abnegation, by persons desirous of liberation, of entities that have
an affinity with Hari, in considering their mundane nature, is termed


81



renunciation possessing little real value.'

[Here Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura points out how to avoid
temptation by only being interested in those persons who exhibit the
inclination to serve the feet of Sri Guru and to practice yukta-vairagya,
not phalgu-vairagya .]

"It is my request to my friends by giving due honour to all persons to

/

follow in their preaching the ideal of Sr! Sanatana GosvamI Prabhu in
his exposition of the aphorism of the Vedanta viz-, 'Cessation of
mundane birth from (the transcendental) sound, cessation of further
birth from sound,' under the section of result to be achieved, to be found
in such Shlokas as 'All Glory to the Bliss of the Name of Murari ...'
"Those nations to whom you are going for the propagation of the chant
of Hari are mounted on the summit of proficiency in all affairs of this
world. They are practised in the exercise of their rational judgement, are
endowed with the quality of good manners should maintain our hope
unshaken that they will prove to be the worthiest recipients of the heard
transcendental Voice if we unlock to them the gates of the natural
exhibition of abiding argument and enduring judgement. If we unpack
our baggage of the genuine discourse of Hari by relying on the qualities
of forbearance it will certainly receive the garland of welcome from the
hearts of nations gifted with keen intelligence.

"We have not been actuated by any attempt of rivalry or hostility in
undertaking this propaganda. This should always be borne in mind. We
should call at the door of each and every seeker of the Truth, bearing on
our heads the baggage of the Real Truth to be offered to them. It is no
business of ours to be elated or discouraged by the praise or neglect of
any person. We must be constantly alive to the duty of enhancing the
pleasure of our Master by serving Him with perfect sincerity.

"We must not look at the world by being weighed down with the
mentality that is oppressed with the sense of deficiency or otherwise, by
the poverty or otherwise, of the display of worldly erudition, rank, etc.
by any particular person. This is the state of forgetfulness of our real
selves. All persons of this world are really superior to us in every way as
far as this world is concerned. All those matters are not any commodities
that are fit to be coveted by us. We are merely beggars with the triple-
staff of renunciation devoted to the chanting of the Words of Sri


82



Caitanya. We have no more nor any higher desirable object than the
Pleasure of serving Sri Hari-Guru-Vaisnavas.

"We are not the operators of the instrument, but only the instruments.

We must always bear this in mind. The triple-staff Bhikshus are the

/

living mrdangas of Sri Caitanya. We must constantly give forth our

music at the lotus-feet of Sri Guru. We should practice the function of

the peripatetic preacher (pari-vrajaka), of carrying aloft the victorious

banner of the Commands of Divine Sri Gaurasundara by constant

submission to Sri Guru and the Vaisnavas, fixing our eye on the pole-

star of the heard transcendental Voice. We must always bear in mind

that we have been initiated in the vow of the peripatetic preacher for

the sole purpose of promulgating the Heart's Desire of Sri Guru and

Gauranga. If we are constantly inspired with the duty of discoursing

about the Truth under the guidance of Sri Guru, no hankering after

travelling, nor any veiled form of desire other than chanting of Hari-

nama, will ever strike any terrors into our hearts.

"The vowed service of the Name, the Transcendental Abode and the

Desire of Sri Gaurasundara, is our only eternal function. We are

Bhikshus of the triple-staff. The in-gathering of the smallest alms, even

such as are gathered by the bees, is our only means for serving the

/

manifestation of the Manifestive Divine Form of Sri Caitanya Math all
over the world. We are neither enjoyers nor abnegators of mundane
entities. We recognise as our highest objective the desire for carrying
with veneration the shoes of the order of the Paramahariisas.

"It will be our only duty, to proclaim to all the people that complete
reliance on the Transcendental Absolute Truth is by far the highest
form of freedom and one that is Infinitely superior to the partial
independent mastery over the distorted reflected entity in the shape of
this mundane world. By holding the straw between our teeth in
supplication we shall carry aloft the banner of that real freedom to all
persons. We should be constantly engaged in chanting the exhilarating
Name of Sri Hari by adopting as our fundamental enlightening principle
that the highest path is the path of submission, endorsed by Sri Rupa
with the further exhortation to cherish the unwavering faith that He
will always protect us."

[What an inspiring speech! Imagine the scene, the magnificently,


83



romantic spiritual figure of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, the
commander-in-chief of the Vaisnavas, exhorting his men to carry the
transcendental Sound into the Heart of Darkness, the Western world,
reminding them that their only duty is to serve the Master with "perfect

sincerity", reminding them that they are not the doers but simply the

/

instruments, the "living mrdangas of Sri Caitanya", giving forth "our

s

music at the lotus-feet of Sri Guru." He is reminding them to remain
humble, that "All persons of this world are really superior to us in every
way as far as the world is concerned." He also reminds them that "We
have not been actuated by any attempt of rivalry or hostility in
undertaking this propaganda." And finally, "It will be our duty to
proclaim to all the people that complete reliance on the Transcendental
Absolute Truth is by far the highest form of freedom ... we shall carry
aloft the banner of real freedom to all persons." This speech shows
perfect realization of the preaching spirit in the mood of the perfect
humility of a Vaisnava.

/

Compare this mood of perfect humility to Srila Prabhupada's prayers
invoking Srila Sarasvatl Thakura's mercy, composed on the Jaladuta on
his journey to America:]

"Sri Srlmad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, who is very dear to Lord

Gauranga, the son of Mother SacI, is unparalleled in his service to the

Supreme Lord Sri Krsna. He is that great saintly spiritual master who

bestows intense devotion to Krsna at different places throughout the

world. By his strong desire, the holy name of Lord Gauranga will spread

throughout all the countries of the Western world. In all the cities,

towns and villages on the earth, from all the oceans, seas, rivers, and

streams, everyone will chant the holy name of Krsna. As the vast mercy
/

of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu conquers all directions, a flood of
transcendental ecstasy will certainly cover the land. When all the sinful,
miserable living entities become happy, the Vaisnavas' desire is then
fulfilled. Although my Guru Maharaja ordered me to do it, I am not
worthy or fit to do it. I am very fallen and insignificant. Therefore, O
Lord, now I am begging you for Your mercy so that I may become
worthy, for You are the wisest and most experienced of all. If you bestow
Your power, by serving the spiritual master one attains the Absolute


84



Truth-one's life becomes successful. If that service is obtained, then one
becomes happy and gets Your association due to good fortune."

[And then arriving in Boston, he speaks out his heart to Lord Krsna: ]
"My dear Lord Krsna, You are so kind upon this useless soul, but I do not
know why You have brought me here. Now You can do whatever You
like with me. But I guess You have some business here, otherwise why
would You bring me to this terrible place? Most of the population here is
covered by the material modes of ignorance and passion. Absorbed in
material life, they think themselves very happy and satisfied, and
therefore they have no taste for the transcendental message of
Vasudeva. I do not know how they will be able to understand it. But I
know Your causeless mercy can make everything possible because You
are the most expert mystic. How will they understand the mellows of
devotional service? O Lord, I am simply praying for Your mercy so that I
will be able to convince them about Your message. All living entities
have come under the control of the illusory energy by Your will, and
therefore, if you like, by Your will they can also be released from the
clutches of illusion. I wish that You may deliver them. Therefore if You
so desire their deliverance, then only will they be able to understand
Your message. The words of Srlmad-Bhagavatam are Your incarnation,
and if a sober person repeatedly receives it with submissive aural

reception, then he will be able to understand Your message! It is said in

/ /

the Srlmad-Bhagavatam (1.2.17-21): 'Sri Krsna, the Personality of
Godhead, who is the Paramatma (Supersoul) in everyone's heart and the
benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material
enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relished His messages,
which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted. By
regularly hearing the Bhagavatam and by rendering service unto the
pure devotee, all that is troublesome in the heart is practically destroyed,
and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with
transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact. At the time
loving service is established in the heart, the modes of passion (rajas)
and ignorance (tamas) and lust and desire (kama) disappear from the
heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness and he becomes
happy. Thus established in the mode of goodness, the man rejuvenated
by loving service to the Lord gains liberation from material association


85



(mukti) and comes to know scientifically of the Personality of Godhead.
Thus the knots of the heart and all misgivings are cut to pieces. The
chain of fruitive actions (karma) is terminated when one sees the Self as
master.' He will become liberated from the influence of the modes of
ignorance and passion and thus all inauspicious things accumulated in
the core of the heart will disappear. How will I make them understand
this message of Krsna consciousness? I am very unfortunate, unqualified,
and the most fallen. Therefore, I am seeking Your benediction so that I
can convince them, for I am powerless to do so on my own. Somehow or
other, O Lord, You have brought me here to speak about You. Now, my
Lord, it is up to You to make me a success or failure as You like. O
spiritual master of all the worlds! I can simply repeat Your message, so if
You like You can make my power of speaking suitable for their
understanding. Only by your causeless mercy will my words become
pure. I am sure that when this transcendental message penetrates their
hearts they will certainly feel engladdened and thus become liberated
from all unhappy conditions of life. O Lord, I am just like a puppet in
Your hands. So if You have brought me here to dance, then make me
dance, make me dance, O Lord make me dance as You like. I have no
devotion, nor do I have any knowledge, but I have strong faith in the
holy name of Krsna. I have been designated as Bhaktivedanta, and now
if You like You can fulfill the real purport of Bhaktivedanta."

[Comparing this powerful invocation for the mercy of Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and Lord Krsna with Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta's L'Envoi, we see that His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada's mood, words and activity were the

living personification of the preacher as described by his spiritual

/

master. We can see that Srlla Prabhupada was clearly the full
manifestation of the intense desires of Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura to spread
Krsna consciousness in the Western world, as he was consumed with the
same intense compassion and humility to deliver the unfortunate. These
two liberated and empowered preachers were clearly Krsna's choice for
the salvation of the earth.]

In May, a preaching center was established in London at Kensington. At
the end of the month Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura received some inquiries


86



from Lord Zetland, who had formerly been the Governor of Bengal

/

during Srlla Prabhupada's student days, and he also heard from the
Marquis of Ludian. He sent them replies. In June he received letters of
thanks and appreciation from the secretary of Lord Irwin, the Marquis
of Ludian, the Editor of the London Times and Sir Stanley Jackson. His
preachers then had a meeting in July with King George V and Queen
Mary at Buckingham Palace, and also with the Archbishop of
Canterbury. By December his European preachers had proceeded to
Germany and France and delivered some lectures there.


1933 to 1936


s

On August 27th of 1933, the appearance Day of Srlla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura delivered a lecture at
the Saraswati Assembly Hall in the Baghbazar temple of the Gaudlya
Math. This lecture was printed in many Gaudlya publications and widely
distributed. Later on in the 1960's, it was reprinted in Back to Godhead
magazine. The title of the discourse was The Vedanta , Its Morphology and
Ontology. The language of the essay was so erudite and complex that we

s

are reminded of Srlla Prabhupada's comment, "Sometimes I would
understand. Sometimes I would not understand, but I would go on
hearing." Scholars and intellectuals are still intrigued and baffled
simultaneously by it. Not that Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura was being
deliberately confusing, but just as certain sounds go above the wave
length that an ordinary human can hear, so similarly some of the
thoughts of such a transcendental genius, are very hard to follow. The
essay is beyond brilliance and beyond scholarship, being perfect spiritual
knowledge. We reproduce here some of the easier portions:

"The Vedanta deals with a theme beyond the finite views of phenomena.
The subjects dealt with in that particular philosophy are not confined to
any part of the material space, any definite span of time or any object of
sensuous peception made up of any substance of this Universe. The
activities of a being are measured in time, the playground of a being


87




either linear, superficial or cubical is accommodated in space and the
limited subjectivity or fleshy tabernacular entity is confined to
phenomenon. The Vedantic scheme is quite different from such limited
structural monuments though some people attempted to bring Vedanta
within the prison bars of their senses.

"Though Vedanta deals with ordinary language quite dovetailing the
views of ordinary intelligentsia to gradually heave them up to the
supersensuous regions where senses cannot work by their present
implements or cannot help them by the words of their credulous friends,
still the transcendental topics are imparted slowly through the linguistic
and rationalistic attainments to differentiate the plane of transcendence
and the undesirable transformable plane of enjoyments. As it is helping
the journey of understanding, we need not stick to a stagnant view in
order to gratify our senses at cost of rationality and harmonious language
exactly fitting our whims. So the method of studying this particular
philosophy should never be confined to the same process of confusing
the transcendence with our present plane of thought."

[Some portions are much harder. One brief example:]

"Some of the adventurers have been found to transform the substratum
itself or proselytize their mundane exploitive journey to the theory of
misconception. The analytic process meets the synthetic aspirant at a
point, and we find a combined attempt of their development in
literatures which are also included later on in the Vedantic School.
Dvaitadvaita scholars of the Bhaskara and the Nimbarka schools have
given us such views. The empiric starting from a perishable plane aiming
at the indestructible direction could bring for us a cumulative view of
the terminus. The system of the Vedanta philosophy should always look
forward to approach the Absolute and not to any non-absolute search.
The mundane morphological march need not be considered identical
with the transcendental morphology which cannot in any case show its
transiency and altering phases."

In August of 1933, the second annual diorama exhibition was held in

Kuruksetra and was called the Gaudlya Exhibition.

/

In September of 1933 Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura went on a safikirtana tour
with his disciples, preaching and chanting in different places around
Navadvlpa, utilizing two motor launches called "Leela" and "Suradham".


88



Towards the end of the year he preached in Patna, where he opened
another diorama exhibition, again called Sat-siksha, and many eminent
persons from Patna University attended. At the end of November he
published his edited edition of Srlla Jlva Gosvaml's Bhakti Sandarbha.
Other preachers went to Karachi and simultaneously a theistic
exhibition was organized in KasI (Benares).

In the beginning of 1934 the Maharaja of Tripura visited Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura in Calcutta and praised the
programs of the Gaudlya Mission. He offered his respects to the feet of
Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, inquired from him on spiritual
topics and heard from him attentively. In February he inaugurated a
newly built temple at the birthsite of Srlla Vrndavana dasa Thakura, at
Modadruma-dvlpa in Navadvlpa-dhama. Srlla Vrndavana dasa Thakura,

the Vyasa of Caitanya-lila, was the author of Lord Caitanya's biography,

/ /

Sri Caitanya-bhagavata. He also opened a temple at Srlvasa-angana, the
place of Lord Caitanya's inauguration of the Sanklrtana Movement, as
well as His nocturnal klrtanas with His eternal associates. The newly
constructed samadhi of his spiritual master, Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa
BabajI was also completed and opened at this time.

During the course of the year, he engaged in discourses with many
scholars, government leaders and religionists, and he initiated a good
number of his followers into the sannyasa order. On June 13th of 1934,
while the foundation of the Mayapur Yogapltha Temple was being dug, a
four-armed Adhoksaja Deity was discovered and identified as the
household Deity of Jagannath Misra, the father of Lord Caitanya.
Everyone on hand was amazed and excited at this event, which only
further confirmed the absolute authenticity of the site discovered by
Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura. In July the deity form of Srlla Gaura Kisora
dasa BabajI was installed in his samadhi temple accompanied by
tremendous sanklrtana. In October Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura and many
disciples stayed in Mathura for more than a month, strictly executing
the Karttika vow. During this time, he spoke on the topics of Krsna's
asta-kalika-llla (the pastimes of the Lord executed during the day's eight
divisions.) On the 29th of October, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura discovered the actual site where Srlla Rupa GosvamI had the
darsana of the Gopala Deity in his old age in the Mathura area.


89



This Deity of Gopala has a great history. He was originally established by
Vajra, the grandson of Krsna. Later, during the Mohammedan era, there
was threat of attack and the priest hid Gopala in the bushes and ran
away. When Madhavendra Purl, the parama-guru of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, came to Vrndavana, Gopala appeared to him in a dream,
told him of his location, and asked him to install him once again on the
top of Govardhana Hill. Madhavendra Purl built a temple, held a
magnificent installation ceremony with hundreds of buckets of water
and mountains of prasadam, and established a very high standard of
Deity worship. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to Vrndavana, in
the mood of a humble devotee, He did not want to put His feet on
Govardhana Hill. Therefore the Deity, on the pretext of an imminent
attack by some Turkish soldiers, descended to the village of Ganthuli-
grama and gave His darsana to (or took darsana of) the ecstatic Sri

Caitanya Mahaprabhu for three days. Later Gopala returned to His

/ /

place on Govardhana Hill. In their old age Srlla Rupa GosvamI and Srlla
Sanatana GosvamI also wanted to receive the darsana of Lord Gopala,
but following in the footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu they did not
want to step on Govardhana Hill. Therefore, the Deity made an
arrangement for them as well, by descending to Mathura and staying in
the temple of Vitthalesvara for one full month. A huge procession of
spiritual luminaries accompanied Srlla Rupa and Srlla Sanatana
Gosvamls to Mathura and stayed with them there. Gopala Bhatta
GosvamI, Raghunatha dasa GosvamI, Raghunatha Bhatta GosvamI,
Lokanatha dasa GosvamI, Bhugarbha GosvamI, Srlla Jiva GosvamI, Sri
Yadava Acarya, and many other exalted Vaisnavas were all present.
Toward the end of 1934 Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura
directed his European preachers to deliver lectures in the German
universities, where there was much interest in Sanskrit and Vedic
culture.

In January of 1935 the Governor of Bengal, Sir John Anderson came to
Mayapur and heard about the Holy Dhama from Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura. In February the 61st birthday of Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was celebrated in Jagannatha Puri,
the place of his appearance, and a large meeting was convened, chaired
by the king of Jagannatha Purl. That was the year that Srlla Prabhupada


90



composed his poem and essay, which he submitted to the Harmonist for

/

publication. One stanza was particularly pleasing to Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura:

Absolute is sentient
Thou has proved ,

Impersonal calamity
Thou hast moved.

He liked it so much that he showed it to everyone who came to see him.
One of Prabhupada's God-brothers compared it to the incident of Srlla
Rupa Gosvaml's composing a verse revealing his understanding of the
inner thinking of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and Srlla Sarasvatl
Thakura liked the essay very much also. He instructed the editor of The
Harmonist, "Whatever he writes, publish it."

On the day after the Vyasa-puja ceremony, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura led his followers on a circumambulation of
Purusottama-dhama, Jagannatha Purl, and spoke to them about its
glories. On Gaura Purnima he was visited in Mayapur by the King of

Tripura, who opened the gate of the Yogapltha Temple. In April he

/

traveled to Gaya, where he opened a center, saw Sr! Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's places of preaching and gave wonderful lectures to a
sophisticated and learned audience. To further spread the waves of Lord
Caitanya's mission, he sent preachers to Burma in the same month.

In June he broadcast, for perhaps the first time, by radio, Harinama
Sankirtana from the Indian Broadcasting Service Center in Calcutta.
This led to regular Sunday broadcasts of various Gaudlya functions like
live broadcasts of sankirtana and bhajana from different parts of
Calcutta, the Janmastami celebration, Nanda-utsav, Radhastami and the

Appearance Celebration of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

/

In September the complete edition of the Srimad-Bhagavatam was

published in 12 Cantos with elaborate indexes, word meanings, Bengali

/

translation, Srlla Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura's Saratha varsini
commentary, Srlla Madhvacarya's purports and Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura's own Vivriti commentary.

In October Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura stayed in Radha-
kunda, Vrndavana, for one month and lived in a small one-storied house


91



which Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura had constructed. He spoke to the
assembled devotees on the Upanisads, C aitanya-caritdmrta, and Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and he installed Deities at the Kunja-beharl Math. It was at
this time that Srlla Prabhupada met with Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura and heard the prophetic comment, "A gun jvalbe" :
"There will be fire", in connection with the fighting over rooms which
had broken out amongst Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's
disciples at the Baghbazar Gaudlya Math. "When we were living in a
rented house," he said, "if we could collect two hundred or three hundred
rupees we were living very nicely at Ultadanga. We were happier then.
But since we have been given this marble palace in Baghbazar, there is
friction between our men. Who will occupy this room? Who will occupy
that room? Who will be the proprietor of this room? Everyone is
planning in different ways. It would be better to take the marble from
the walls and secure money. If I could do this and print books, that
would be better." Then he turned to Srlla Prabhupada and said, "Amar
iccha child kichu bai karana”: "I had a desire to print some books. If you
ever get money, print books. "Thus, important seeds were planted.

On November 6th Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura established
a puspa samadhi for Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura at Kunja-biharl Math in
Radha-kunda, and following this, he preached in Delhi and Gaya* News
came regarding preaching successes in Burma and notable discussions
were held with a number of western scholars. In December he went to

Patna and Allahabad, and in Allahabad delivered discourses on the

/ /

instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Srlla Rupa GosvamI on the
original site.

1936 was to be the last year of the intense preaching which had resulted
in 64 temples being established in India and abroad. During this final
year Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura met with many scholars,
installed Deities, established more temples and preached widely in
Mayapura, Cuttack, Purl (for 100 days), Alalanatha, Dacca, Kuruksetra,
Darjeeling, Mathura, Vrndavana (where he established a bhajana kutir
at Govardhana) and then back to Calcutta, where he was constantly
engaged in preaching. A doctor named Sivapada Bhattacarya tried to
restrain him from so much lecturing, due to his heart condition, but
Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura replied to his entreaties, "Life


92



is for the glorification of topics on Hari. If that is stopped, then what
need is there to carry on life." In that same year in discourses in Dacca
he had made some revealing remarks in the same line:

"Physical illness with Hari-bhajana is preferred to physical fitness sans
Hari-bhajana."

"Our span of life on earth is short. Our life will be crowned with success
if the body wears out with constant discourses on Hari."

He also uttered some other aphoristic remarks at these Dacca
meetings, which due to their pithy and swtra-like nature remind one of
the renowned Canakya Pandita, had Canakya been a pure devotee of
Krsna.

"We are here on earth not to work as artisans for making big buildings
with wood and stone but to work only as messengers of the teachings of
Sri Caitanya Deva."

"We are put to test and trial in this world. Only those who attend the
kirtana of the devotees can succeed."

"A sychophant is neither a guru or a preacher."

"To transform the adverse desires of the jlvas is the supreme duty of the
most merciful. To rescue one person from the stronghold of Mahamaya
is an act of superb benevolence, far superior to opening innumerable
hospitals."

"Every spot on earth where discourses on God are held is a place of
pilgrimage."

"Possession of objects not related to Krsna is our main malady."

"Let me not desire anything but the highest good for my worst enemies."
"Unless we are devoted to God, secularism shall not leave us."

"As dalliance with the body in luxury increases, so wanes the spirit of
service for the Lord."

"Those favored by God find their paths set by thorns."

"There is no peace or happiness in our worldly life. Circumstances create
turmoil and annoyance."

"Chant the maha-mantra loudly and with attachment. This will drive
away inertia, worldly evils and pests."

"Be indifferent to bazaar gossips, stick firmly to your cherished goals, no
lack or impediments of the world will ever stand in your way."


93



"Pay due respects to the extroverts of the world, but do not be
appreciative of their manners and conduct. They are to be shaken off
from your mind."

"A devotee feels the presence of God everywhere, but one averse to the
Lord denies His existence anywhere."

"You cannot appreciate transcendental matters with the reasoning of
the world. It is sheer nonsense to decry them with the measuring stick of
your intellect."

/

"To recite the name of Sri Krsna is bhakti.

In October Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura sent Bhakti
Saranga Maharaja to preach in England and, if possible, America. His
other preachers had not been able to accomplish anything very
substantial after three years of preaching. They had met many scholars
and dignitaries, and there was one woman who had started a center in
England, but beyond that none of their preaching had established any
sizeable centers, despite great expenditure on the effort.

When Bhakti Saranga Maharaja later met Lord Zetland, who had very
favorably received the first preachers and arranged various conferences
for them, the English lord had asked him, "Swamiji, can you make us
into brahmanas?” The reply was forthcoming, "Yes, why not." When the
lord inquired about the restrictions, Bhakti Saranga Maharaja replied,
"No meat-eating, no illicit sex, no intoxication and no gambling."
"Impossible!" came the astounded reply. And that had reflected the
conclusion of those preachers-that to actually turn mlecchas (meat-
eaters) into followers of Vedic culture was practically impossible. It
continued to appear impossible with the exception of the English lady

s

and some German scholars who became Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura's disciples, until Srlla Prabhupada came to the West and

exhibited the transcendental empowerment bestowed upon him by the

/

grace of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and Lord Gauranga!


The Final Days


94




In October Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura went to Jagannatha
Purl, and there he exhibited his pastime of illness for some time. At the
Chatak-parvata in Jagannatha Purl, which is considered to be non-
different than Giri-Govardhana, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura observed Madhvacarya's Appearance Day celebration and
chanted verses specified for such occasions from the writings of Srlla

Rupa and Srlla Raghunatha dasa Gosvaml's writings. He also held a

/

similar festival for his spiritual master, Srlla Gaura Kisora dasa BabajI
Maharaja.

While he was passing his days in Purl, he was often heard to utter

/ /

phrases from the verses of Srlla Rupa GosvamI and Srlla Raghunatha
dasa GosvamI:


pratyasam me tvarin kuru govardhana purnam
"Oh Govardhana! Please fulfill my desire."

nijanikatanivasarh dehi govardhana tvarin
"Oh Govardhana! Please give me a dwelling place on the banks of the

pond nearby You."

He also said pointedly, "You all take to sincere Hari-bhajana. There are
not many more days." He gave lectures in Purl for about a month and a
half, and then on December 6th he left Purl for Calcutta.

At the Purl station he was paid respects by many distinguished persons,
especially due to their appreciation of his monumental activities of
preaching Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's message in India, as well as
abroad. Along the route there was a stop in Cuttack, where he was met
by Professor Sanyal and other followers, and in Calcutta many devotees
greeted him at Howrah Station and brought him to the Gaudlya Math at
Baghbazar. There he gave a lecture which lasted over an hour, and he
covered many profound topics. He spoke of the importance of good
association, the mystery of Lord Caitanya's madness-in-separation in
Puri during the last days at the Gambhlra in the association of Srlla
Svarupa Damodara and Srlla Ramananda Raya. He spoke of the guru's
vision of seeing his guru everywhere:

"It is my Gurudeva who is graciously present in all these different forms.
If he is not graciously present in all these different forms who would


95



then preserve me? Those whom my Gurudeva has made his own are my
saviors. The order of the gurus who have in their nature the protecting
power of the Divinity, are always present in different forms and figures
to bestow their mercy on me. All of them are specific manifestations of
Sri Guru who confers spiritual knowledge ... The transcendental
reflections, which are also of the nature of supporters, are the worship of
the Divinity, which appear in the different planes of cognitive
existences, are my Gurudeva in His different forms. He who is

constantly showing us how to serve Godhead throughout life, is no other

/ /

than our Sr! Gurudeva. Sr! Gurudeva is present in every object as the
supporting principle. He is graciously present in every object."

cuta-priyala panasasana-kovidara
jambv-arka-bilva-bakuldmra-kadamba-nipdh
ye 'nye pardrtha-bhavakd yamunopakulah
samsantu krsna-padavlm rahitdtmandm nab

"O Cuta, O Priyala, O Panasa, Asana and Kovidara, O Jambu, O Arka,

O Bilva, Bakula and Amra, O Kadamba and Nlpa and all you other
plants and trees living by the banks of the Yamuna who have dedicated
your very existence to the welfare of others, we gopis have lost our
minds, so please tell us where Krsna has gone." (S.B. 10.30.9) Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura also discussed the danger of
discussing other topics, after having admitted the topics of the Supreme
Lord are "superior", thereby indicating that other topics in connection
with the Lord are "inferior".

He quoted the line from Raghunatha dasa Gosvaml's M anah Siksa: sada
dambham hitva-always give up pride. He discussed the necessity of being
careful about offenses to Vaisnavas, especially in connection to the
brahmanda brahmite verse from the Caitanya-caritamrta, particularly

describing the dangerous creepers of adoration, profit and distinction.

/ /

He quoted from Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura's Saranagati from the
Dainya (Humility) section, which begins dmdra jlvana sada pape rata
nahiko punyera lesa-" I am an impious sinner and have caused others
great anxiety and trouble", in which Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura feels
himself to be a grossly sinful, materialistic person. The translation which
perfectly describes the life of an envious materialist serves to instruct us


96



what qualities must be overcome in our endeavor for self-realization and
which a self-realized person, in his humility, feels that he still possesses:

1. I am an impious sinner and have caused others great anxiety and
trouble.

2. I have never hesitated to perform sinful acts for my own
enjoyment. Devoid of all compassion, concerned only with my
own selfish interests, I am remorseful seeing others happy. I am a
perpetual liar, and the misery of others is a source of great pleasure
for me.

3. The material desires in my heart are unlimited. I am wrathful,
devoted to false pride and arrogance, intoxicated by vanity and
bewildered by worldly affairs. Envy and egotism are the ornaments
I wear.

4. Ruined by laziness and sleep, I resist all pious deeds; yet I am
very active and enthusiastic to perform wicked acts. For worldly
fame and reputation I engage in the practice of deceitfulness.

Thus I am destroyed by my own greed and am always lustful.

5. A vile, wicked man such as this, rejected by godly people, is a
constant offender. I am such a person, devoid of all good works,
forever inclined toward evil, worn out and wasted by various
miseries.

6. Now in old age, deprived of all means of success, humbled and
poor, Bhaktivinoda submits his tale of grief at the feet of the
Supreme Lord.

It is clear from these themes, that aside from personally feeling a state of
profound humility, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was
discussing the giving up of pride, the weeds that choke the creeper of
devotion and the above verses were a profound instruction and warning
to his disciples about how to cultivate bhakti with great humility
themselves. He was aware of the fire of ordeal that was to come for them


97



collectively and individually. Therefore, he identified the anarthas and
explained how to remove them without falling prey to arrogance or envy
of others. The great acarya who was now soon to depart was giving
essential instructions about the pitfalls that would ensnare many of his
disciples.

[In the same manner in Srila Prabhupada's last days he gave many
warnings about cooperation and not allowing ourselves to be falsely
motivated by pride or egotism. Similarly he exhibited extreme humility,
asking his God-brothers to forgive him for his offenses, saying that he
had been proud, etc. And we see how cogent and important these
warnings by the self-realized acaryas are, who although having
personally transcended such petty problems of heart, can clearly see the
absolute necessity to warn their neophyte disciples about the stumbling
blocks on the path of bhakti, both by example and precept.]

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura elaborated on these themes in
Dacca in 1935:

"Look within. Amend yourself, rather than pry into the frailities of
others."

"In this world of Maya, averse to the Lord, full of trials and tribulations,
only patience, humility and respect for others are our friends for Hari-
bhajana."

"The Lord, Gaurasundara, puts His devotees in various difficulties and
associations to test their patience and strength of mind. Success depends
on their good fortune."

"When faults in others misguide and delude you-have patience,
introspect, find faults in yourself. Know that others cannot harm you
unless you harm yourself."

"I wish that every selfless, tender-hearted person of Gaudlya Math will
be prepared to shed two hundred gallons of blood for the nourishment of
the spiritual corpus of every individual of this world."

That evening Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura gave another
long lecture which centered on the theme of how to deal with an
unwieldy mind. He again referred to the first verse of Manah Siksa by
Raghunatha dasa GosvamI:

"O Mind! My brother! I fall down at your feet and beg you to relish


98



unprecedented and excessive rati ( bhava ) in the constant remembrance
of the spiritual master, the cows, the cowherdsmen, and the milkmaids of
Vraja, the loving devotees of Lord Krsna, the pure brahmanas, the living
mantra (heard from the divine master which releases the mind from
maya's bondage), the Holy Names of Krsna and the divine youthful
couple of Vraja, casting aside all thoughts of pride (egoism) of the
mundane plane, at all times and under all circumstances.”

He also referred to Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura's song from the Gitavali
under the topic of sreyo-nirnaya (spiritual welfare) which begins: bhaja
re bhaja re amar mana ati manda: "Worship, O worship, extremely
wicked mind." He explained the song in some detail, especially the first
verse:


bhaja re bhaja re amar mana ati manda
(bhajan bind gati ndi re)

(bhaja) braja-bane radha-krsna caranaravinda
jnana-karma parihari re
(bhaja) braja-bane radha-krsna

"O my mind, how wicked (foolish) you are. Just worship the lotus feet of
Radha and Krsna in the forests of Vraja. Without such worship there is
no means of spiritual advancement. Give up all speculative knowledge
and materialistic activities and just worship Radha and Krsna in the
forests of Vraja."

On the 13th day of December, 1936 at the Gaudlya Math's Auditory
Hall, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura gave a very long lecture
in which he covered a wide range of topics, touching again and again on
the theme of the danger of worldliness encroaching on one's spiritual
endeavors. He quoted a song he had written called Nirjana Anartha:

tomara kanaka, bhogera janaka,
kanakera dvare sevaka madhava;
kaminira kdma, nahe tava dhama,
tdhdra malika kevala yadava.
pratisthasataru, jadamaya-maru,
nd pela rdvdna yujhiya raghava;
vaisnavi pratistha, td'te kara nistha


99



taha na bhajile albhibe raurava


"Your gold is the progenitor of enjoyment-serve Madhava with gold. The
desire in your heart for beautiful women is not for you-their only
proprietor is Yadava. The tree of desire for fame is the desert of the
illusory energy. Ravana did not get it by struggling against Raghava. Be
dedicated to the fame of a Vaisnava. If you do not worship that, you will
go to hell (raurava).”

[In the Fifth Canto of Srlmad-Bhagavatam (5.26.10), the type of person
who deserves to go to the hell of Raurava is described as follows:]

"A person who accepts this body as his self works very hard day and
night for money to maintain his own body and the bodies of his wife and
children. While working to maintain himself and his family, he may
commit violence against other living entities. Such a person is forced to
give up his body and his family at the time of death, he suffers reaction
for his envy of other creatures by being thrown into the hell called
Raurava. "

Again the theme of ridding oneself of anarthas was strongly being
preached by Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura. Compassionately,
he was urging everyone to give up pride and envy and simply immerse
themselves in spreading the glories of the Lord. His mission had become
an immense vehicle for this. He didn't want it to fail. He quoted multiple
sources to establish the point of single-minded devotion to Krsna.

Finally, he concluded:

"We are all sojourners on the path of death. Everyone has to die;
therefore, in this state of life whether one is male or female, high or low,
king or subject, rich or poor, learned or foolish-everyone can make this

very rare human form of life successful by becoming a servant of the

/

servant of the eternally pure, completely blissful Sri Hari. Even in this
conditioned life one can become liberated. Therefore, it is
overwhelmingly necessary to try ..."

On December 23rd, eight days before entering the eternal pastimes of
the Lord, he made the following remarks:

"I have given anxiety to many people, as I have been compelled to speak
genuinely truthful words, and as I have told people to worship Hari
without any hypocrisy. There are possibly many people who even


100



consider me to be an enemy. So that they may become eager to perform
the sincere service of Sri Krishna, freed from other desires and
deceitfulness, I have given various types of anxieties to numerous people.
One day or another they will certainly be able to understand this.

"With great enthusiasm preach the words of Sri Rupa Raghunatha to
everyone. Our ultimately desirable object is to become the dust at the
lotus feet of the followers of Sri Rupa. All of you remain united in
allegiance to the Asraya-vigraha (spiritual master) in order to satisfy the
senses of the Transcendental Entity of Non-Dual Knowledge. Everyone,
with the sole view of worshipping Hari, will carry on life in this
temporary, two-day material existence in any way possible. Do not give
up the worship of Hari even amidst hundreds of dangers, hundreds of
insults or hundreds of persecutions. Do not become unenthusiastic upon
seeing that the majority of people in this world are not accepting the
message of Krishna’s sincere worship. Never give up the audition and
glorification of the topics of Krishna. They are your own personal
worship and your very all and all. Being humble like a blade of grass and
patient like a tree, constantly glorify Hari.

"We are nurturing a desire to dedicate this good-for-nothing body in the

/

samklr tana- sacrifice of Sri Krishna Chaitanya and His associates. We are
not at all desirous of any heroism in fruitive actions or religion, but our

a

real condition is to be the dust at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa Prabhu birth
after birth- this is our all and all. The line of Bhaktivinode will never be
closed. With even more enthusiasm you should become engaged in
preaching the desire of Bhaktivinode ’s heart. Amongst you there are
many capable and accomplished men. We have no other desire at all,
these are our only words:

adadanastrinam dantairidarin yace punah punah;
srimadrupapadambhojadhulih syarin janma-janmani.

’Taking a blade of grass between my teeth I fall down and again and

/

again pray that I may become the dust at the feet of Srlmad Rupa birth
after birth:

"There are various types of inconveniences while staying in this world,
but there is no need for us to become extremely afflicted by these


101



inconveniences or to try to dispel these inconveniences. While staying
here it is necessary for us to gain an introduction to what our eternal life
will be and to what Entity we will attain to after all these
inconveniences have been removed. Here, it is compulsory to make
decisions about all those objects which attract and repel us in various
ways-both that which I want and do not want. We will be drawn by the
attractions and repulsions of this place to the same degree as the amount
of intervening distance there is between us and the lotus feet of Krishna.
When we go beyond the attractions and repulsions of this world and are
attracted by the Transcendental Name, then the topics about the
mellow of service to Krishna can be understood. At the present time the
topics about Krishna are greatly startling and perplexing. Adventitious
occurences are obstructing our eternally needed realization. To
eliminate these, everyone who holds the name of a human being is more
or less consciously or unconsciously engaged in a struggle. To enter into
that eternally needed kingdom beyond all duality is our only necessity.
"In this world we do not have any attachment or aversion towards
anybody. All the arrangements of this world are momentary. That
supreme desideratum is indispensably necessary for every single person.

May all of you, with one aim and in a single voice, attain the right of

— /

serving the original Asraya-vigraha. May the flow of thought of Sri
Rupa’s followers stream over the world. May we never, in any condition
whatsoever, show aversion to the sacrifice of chanting the seven-tongued

s

samkirtana of Sri Krishna. If there is ever increasing attachment for this,
perfection on all sides will be achieved. May all of you, by the earnest
pursuance of Sri Rupa’s followers, preach the words of Sri Rupa-
Raghunatha in a fearless voice with supreme enthusiasm.”

DISAPPEARANCE-NITYA LILA

On the morning of December 31, 1936, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati

/ / /

Thakura requested Sripada B. R. Sridhara Maharaja to sing Srz Rupa
Manjari by Srila Narottama dasa Thakura and Sripada Navin Krishna
Vidyalankar to sing the Siksastaka. In the forenoon he requested the
Editor of the Gaudlya magazine to see to it that the Vaisnava Manjusha
(Casket of Vaisnava Vocabulary) would be compiled and published.

In his last days he had specifically requested that his disciples form a


102



Governing Body Commission (GBC) of 10 or 12 devotees to manage the
Society's affairs.

Two of his last statements were, "Love and rupture-both should have the
same end in view. Thakura Narottama lived on the principles of Rupa-
Raghunatha. It is good to follow that path." To all he announced, "Please
accept my blessings to you all, present and absent. Please bear in mind-
our sole duty and religion is to spread and propagate service to the Lord
and His devotees."

Thus, the great acarya, the simha-guru, the uncompromising sadhu, the
"Vaikuntha man" as Srlla Prabhupada once described him the tireless

s

preacher of the pure teachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left this
material world uttering the name of Krsna at about 5:30 A.M. on
Thursday, January 1st, 1937, and entered the pastimes of the Supreme
Lord, having firmly established the foundation of a spiritual movement,
which would be carried around the world by his pure servant, His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the Founder/Acarya of
the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

samAdhi

After Orii Visnupada (108) Sri Srlmad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
GosvamI Maharaja Prabhupada's disappearance pastime, his
transcendental body was worshipped with scented oil, flowers and
sandalwood paste. Then his spiritual body was brought before the Deities
in the Sri Sarasvata Auditory Hall and decorated with flowers, garlands
and cloth. There the appropriate worship and arati was performed.

After this, an immense sankirtana procession carried the divine form to
Sealdah Railway Station. Along the way, thousands had a final darsana.
From Krishnanagar he was moved by motor car to Svarupganj and
carried with a sankirtana procession to Srldhama Mayapur. A huge
crowd of devotees and onlookers had gathered, and there was an
immense outpouring of grief and separation, but simultaneously a
constant glorification of the Holy Name of Krsna.

First, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was brought to the

Yogapltha, then to Srlvasangana, and then to Sri Advaita Bhavana.

/

Finally, he was brought to Sri Vrajapattana, the place of his intense
bhajana where he had performed the vow of chanting a billion names.


103



He was taken to the front of the samadhi of Om Visnupada Gaura

Kisora dasa BabajI Maharaja by the banks of Radha-kunda and then to

/

the Sri Avidyaharana Natya Mandira where tremendous kirtana was
held for the whole night.

The work on the samadhi was immediately begun by sannyasis,
babajis, brahmacaris, grhasthas and vanaprasthas who had all taken
shelter at his lotus feet. At the end of the night samadhi mantras were
written on his body according to the directions of the Samskara Dipika

s

by Srlla Gopala Bhatta Gosvaml. His spiritual body was then brought to
the samadhi site and placed on a throne of white marble. His feet were
anointed with aguru and sandalwood paste, and the flowers offered to

his feet collected. Flower garlands were offered around his neck, and

/

tulasi plants were sown on all sides. His favorite songs were sung: Sri
Rupa Mahjari, Svananda-sukhada-kunja-manohara, and Yasomatl-
nandana. Then, chanting ye anilo prema dhana, the devotees
circumambulated the samadhi site four times. The samadhi was covered
with earth and surrounded by tulasi on all four sides, marked with the
sign of tilaka and covered with flower garlands. Then a fire sacrifice,
offering of bhoga and arati were performed, and there were readings
from the Disappearance of Srlla Haridasa Thakura and Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's poems from the end of his
Anubhasya.

Thus, the " deary a- sun”, as he had been called by his father Srlla
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, passed from earthly vision, and he entered the
eternal pastimes of the Lord.


His Contributions Summarized


His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada especially

/

commented on Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's powerful
preaching against caste-ism and sahajiyas, and how effective he was at
debunking these very strongly rooted influences in Indian cultural and


104




religious traditions. This was practically one of his most important
contributions, coupled with his constant axe blows against the
impersonalists and voidists.

He also did much to establish a unifying influence on the various
Vaisnava sects by stressing the points of agreement shared by the four

major sampradayas. He published the writings of the other Vaisnava

/ /

deary as, especially Srlla Madhvacarya and Srlla Ramanujacarya and also
published accounts of their lives.

In his travels throughout India and especially South India, he enjoyed a
reputation as an incredibly powerful debator, and received the title
"simha-guru "- lion guru. Various proponents of the Mayavadl school
would cross the street rather than confront him, and he was known to
accost such scholars and chastise them for cheating the innocent public
with false philosophy.

He established 64 temples, 17 in Navadvlpa-Mandala, including the 29-

/ / / /

pinnacled Sri Chaitanya Math, Sri Advaita Bhavana, Sri Srlvasangana,
the large temple at the site of the Yogapltha, which was opened by the
King of Tripura in 1935, Svananda-sukhada-kunja, the place of bhajana
and samadhi of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, Modadruma Gaudlya Math,
the site of Vrndavana dasa Thakura's appearance, and many others.

He established 13 more in other parts of Gauda-mandala and Bengal,
notably Sri Gaudlya Math in Calcutta, first established at No. 1
Ultadanga Junction Road in 1920, and which later shifted to the marble
temple in Baghbazar. Five more were established in Sri Ksetra-mandala
at Purl, Alalanatha, Bhuvaneswar, and Cuttack. In Vraja-mandala 10
temples were established in Vrndavana, Mathura, Varsana,

Nandagrama, Hodal, Govardhana, Radhakunda, etc. 14 more were
established in other important sites in India: Assam, Madras, Bihar,
Benares, Allahabad, Naimisaranya, Haridwar, Delhi, Kuruksetra,
Balesvara, Bombay, Gaya, and Kovuur, the site of the talks between Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Ramananda Raya.

Outside of India temples were established in Rangoon, and small centers
in London and Germany.

Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura established many presses and
printed thousands of books. In 1928 he even established a daily
newspaper called the Nadia Prakash. When challenged how it was


105



possible to publish a daily newspaper about God, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura explained how this world was a small place, only one
quarter of the creation, compared to the spiritual world which comprises
the other three quarters. He further replied, "Here in this world there
are thousands of newspapers and magazines reporting the stale,
repetitious happenings of this limited space. So for reporting the news of
the unlimited spiritual realm, concerning the eternal, ever-fresh
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we could publish a newspaper at every
second, what to speak of daily."

His presses were the Bhagawat Yantra (Bhagawat Press) established in
Calcutta in 1913, the Gaudlya Printing Works established in Calcutta in
1923, the Nadia Prakash Printing Press established in Mayapura in 1928,
and the Paramarthi Printing Works, established in 1936 in Cuttack,
Orissa.

He published the following magazines: Sajjana Tosani, established in
1881 by Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura (later taken over by Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and re-named The Harmonist , an
English monthly); The Gaudlya , his first magazine, established in 1922 as
the official weekly journal of the Gaudlya Math; The Nadia Prakash,
established in 1926 initially as a English/Bengali magazine, but later a
daily newspaper; The Bhagavata, established in 1931, as a Hindi
fortnightly; The Paramarthi, established in 1932, a fortnightly Oriyan
magazine; and Klrtana, established in 1932, an Assamese monthly.

He personally wrote over 108 essays and books (listed fully in Appendix
1) and aside from these, he also published hundreds of articles in the
Sajjana Tosani, Nivedana, Gaudlya, and Nadiya Prakash.

Apart from his own writing, he also published many other books: the

/

Bhagavad-glta with commentary by Srlla Visvanatha CakravartI

/ /

Thakura, Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, etc., 12 Cantos of Srlmad-
Bhagavatam, with commentary by Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, Srlla

Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura, Srlla Madhvacarya and others, the

/

Caitanya-bhagavata with his Gaudlya Bhasya, the Sri Caitanya

Candramrta and Navadvlpa-Sataka by Srlla Prabhodananda Sarasvatl,

/

the Vedanta-tattvasara by Srlla Ramanujacarya, the M ani-manjarl by
Srlla Madhvacarya, the Sadacara-smrti by Srlla Madhvacarya, the
Navadvlpa-dhama-granthamala by Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, an


106



/ /
English version of the Sri Caitanya-bhagavata and 20,000 copies of Srlla

Narottama dasa Thakura's Prema-bhakti-candrika, the Sri Caitanya

Mangala by Locana dasa Thakura, the Brahma-samhita with Srlla Jlva

Gosvaml's comments and his own Gaudiya Bhasya. He also edited

countless other books by his father and was prepared to do much more.

He met with many scholars, leaders and educators and established Krsna

consciousness as a great science, worthy of the highest esteem. He had

interviews and debates with the acaryas of other schools of thought and

was never defeated, thus establishing the acintya-bhedabheda-tattva

philosophy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as the supreme doctrine of all

time.

He also propagated theistic displays and diorama exhibitions in

Kuruksetra in 1928, 1933, and 1936, in Mayapur in 1930, in Calcutta in

1930, 1931, in Dacca in 1933, in Patna, Bihar in 1933, in KasI (Benares) in

1933 and in Prayaga (Allahabad) in 1936. These exhibitions were free

and were staged with the help of toys, dolls, pictures, writings and even

mechanical devices for moving the dolls, describing the Mas of Lord

Krsna, Lord Caitanya, etc. Generally, these exhibitions were held for 15

days, but occasionally longer, according to popular demand.

He also established several important parikramas of the Dhamas,

especially the Navadvlpa Dhama Parikrama and the Vraja M andala

/

Parikrama, which were both originally set in motion by Sr! Caitanya
Mahaprabhu Himself, setting the example as the greatest devotee of
Krsna. The whole purpose of organizing these huge undertakings, in
which thousands took part, was to arouse the awareness of the reality of
the Lord's pastimes in the minds of the pilgrims. He also discovered
many pilgrimage sites of Lord Caitanya and His associates' pastimes and
established Pada-pithas, Lotus Leet markers on many sites of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's preaching pastimes from His pilgrimage tour of
India.

Srlla Sarasvatl Thakura always emphasized klrtana and talks about Krsna
and called his press the Brihat M rdariga, meaning the Greater Mrdariga,
which could be heard far and wide, as opposed to just a few blocks.

He preached the theme of daivi-varnasrama very vigorously, in the line
of Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, as well as the division of devotional
writing into three categories: sambandha (establishing one's relationship


107



with the Lord), abhidheya (acting according to one's constitutional
relationship with God), and prayojana (the ultimate goal of life, love of

God). He particularly stressed the line of thought coming down from

/ /

Srlla Rupa GosvamI and Srlla Raghunatha Dasa GosvamI, the acaryas of
abhidheya and prayojana-tattvas respectively.

Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was an innovator in many
ways. Although sannyasis traditionally never used any conveyances with
the exception of ox-carts, he rode in motor cars, motorized boats, etc.
Although sannyasis never wore sewn cloth, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura and his preachers on occasion wore overcoats, kurtas,
etc. He utilized the radio for broadcasting his message and sent sannyasis
over the sea, which was considered revolutionary. All of this innovation
was strictly in the mood of spreading the glories of the Lord and
engaging people in Krsna consciousness. He adhered strictly to the
principles of Gaudlya Vaisnavism, but with a view to liberate people. His
principle of renunciation was the type described by Srlla Rupa Gosvaml-
yukta vairagya, engaging the illusory energy fully in the service of Krsna.
For himself, he was never influenced by any desire for adoration or any
other sort of sense gratification, being an eternally liberated servitor of
the Lord.

Armed with the books of the Gosvamls and Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura,
he fought against deviant sects like the Auls, Bauls, Kartabhajas, Neda,
Darbesh, Shai, Atitari, Churadhari, and all other malpractices, nonsense
theories, Mayavadls, atheists, etc. He was indomitable. Once in Dacca,
where there was a great prominence of sahajiyas and caste conscious
people, the word was passed around that Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura's sannyasis and brahmacaris should not be given any alms and
that the doors should be shut in their faces. When his disciples asked
him what to do, he replied that if necessary they should subsist off
Ganges water alone, but not to give up distributing Lord Caitanya's
message. With great determination, they continued to preach, gradually
received help, and ultimately a nice center was established in Dacca,
despite so much opposition.

His physical appearance was tall. He had long arms, a slender body,
broad forehead, aquiline nose, intense eyes, golden complexion, and he
was full of ecstatic love of God. His presence was amiable and majestic.


108



He was well-versed in all subjects and scriptures, having devoured and
memorized many libraries, and was called the "Living Encyclopedia". He
knew Sanskrit, Bengali, English, Astronomy, and many other branches
of knowledge. He was very courageous, had unlimited capacity for

preaching, and was naturally decorated with all 26 qualities of a pure

/

devotee. Srlla Prabhupada once commented when asked about His
Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Gosvami Maharaja, "What can
I say? He was a Vaikuntha man!"


Appendix I


List Of The Principal Publications Of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura With Dates Of Publication

This list is reproduced from Srila Sarasvati Thakur (A Short Sketch of
His Career and Teachings) by Tridandibhiksu Srimad Bhakti Pradip
Tirtha. Printed by Sri Jagajjiban Das at Sri Bhagabat Press, Baghbazar,
Calcutta.

('W 1 written and 'Ed 1 edited)

W-1886-Prahlada-Charitra (in 5 chapters in Bengali verses)

W-1896- Articles on Astrology published in the monthly magazines
'Brihaspati' and Jyotirvid 1 : -(a) Bengali translation and explanation
of Bhaskaracharya's Siddhanta-Shiromani Goladhyaya with
Basanabhasya, (b) Bengali translation of
Ravichandrasayanaspastha, Laghujatak with annotation of
Bhattotpala, (c) Bengali translation of Laghuparashariya or
Ududaya-Pradip with Bhairava Datta's annotation, (d) Whole of
Bhauma-Siddhanta, according to Western calculation, (e) Whole
of Arya-Siddhanta by Aryabhatta, (f) Paramadishwara's Bhatta,
Dipika-Tika, Dinakaumudi, Chamatkara-Chitamoni, Jyotish-
Tatwa-Samhita


109




W-1897-Sanskrit Bhaktamal (a review, in Sajjana-toshani 8/4)

W-1899-Sriman Nathamuni (in Sajjanatoshani from 10/3)

Ed.-1899-Nivedana (a weekly journal, the spiritual portion)

W-1899-Yamunacharya (in Sajjanatoshani from 10/50)

W-1899-Sri Ramanujacharya (in Sajjanatoshani from 11/8)

W-1900-Bange Samajikata (a review of the society and religious
sects of Bengal, in Bengali)

W-1911-Truth regarding the comparative position between a
Brahmana and a Vaishnava (in Bengali)

W-1913-Sept. 7 1913 -June 14 1915-Sri Chaitanya-Charitamrita
(commentary named 'Anubhasya')

W-1914 (finished on Aug. 28)-Anuvritti (explanation of
Upadeshamrita)

Ed.-1914-Gaura-Krishnodaya (an epic composed by Govindadas an
Utkal poet)

Ed.-1914-Srimad Bhagavad-Glta (with annotation by Srila
Vishvanath Chakravarty and translation by Srila Thakur
Bhaktivinode

Ed.-1914-Nabadwip Panjika (pocket edition)

W-1914-Sangita-Madhava (a poem in Sanskrit, published in
Sajjanatoshani 18th year)

1915-1916-Sri Sajjanatoshani (from the 18th year, edited and
published the following articles):

Purvabhash, Pranir Prati Daya, Madhvamuni-Charit, Books on
Bhakti in the Visvavidyalaya (university), Thakurer Smriti-
Samiti, Divyasuri or Alvar, Jayatirtha, Godadevi, Pancharatrik
Adhikar, Prapti Svikar, Vaishnava-Smriti, Sri Patrikar Katha,
Bhaktanghrirenu, Kulashekhar, Samayik Prasanga, Sri Gauranga,
Abhakti-marga, Vishnucitta, Pratikul Matavad, Krishnadas Babaji,


110



Toshanir Katha, Gurusvarup, Prabodhananda, Bhaktimarga,
Samalochana, Toshani-Prasanga, Artha and Anartha,
BaddhaTatastha and Mukta, Gohite Purvadesh, Prakrita and
Aprakrita, Antardwip, Prakat-Purnima, Chaitanyabda,
Upakurvan, Varshashesh.

1916- 1917-Sajjanatoshani (19th year) Articles:

Navavarsha, Asaner Katha, Samayik Prasanga, Acharya-Sanatan,

Videshe Gaura Katha, Samalochana, Amar Prabhur Katha (life of

/

Om Vishnupad Paramahamsa Srlla Gaurakishore das Gosvami
Maharaj), Vaishnaver Vishaya, Gurusvarup (a query), Vaishnava-
Vamsha, Viraha-Mahotsava, Sri Patrikar Ukti, Prakrita-Rasa
Shata-Dushani (refutation of the wrong-mentality of the Prakrita-
Sahajiya-Sampradaya), Duiti Ullekh, Ganer Adhikari Ke?,
Sadachar, Amaya, Prathana Rasa-Vivriti (an explanation of Srila
Narottama Thakur's 'Prarthana'), Pratibandhak, Bhai Sahajiya,
Varshashesh.

1917- 1918-Sajjanatoshani (20th year) Articles:

Navavarsha, Samlochana, Samayik Prasanga, SajjanKripalu,
Shati-Parinata Jagat, Sajjan Akritadroha, Prarthana-Rasa-Vivriti,
Sajan Satyasar, Prakrita Shudra Vaishnava Nahe,

Nagarimangalya, Sajjan Sama, Sajan Nirdosha, Sajjan Vadanya,
Bhadatiya Bhakta Nahe, Sajan Mridu, Sajan Akinchan, Sajan
Shuchi, Vaishnava Darshan (a lecture delivered in Sahitya-Sabha
in the Town Hall of Krishnagar in March 1918), Varshashesh

1918- 1919-Sajjanatoshani (21 st year) Articles:

Navavarsha, Sajan Sarvopakarak, Sajan Shanta, Sri Gaura Ki
Vastu?, Sajjan Krishnaikasharan, Sajan Akam, Sajjan Niriha,
Sajjan Sthir, Sajan Vijita Shadgun, Sri Murti and mayavad, Sri
Vishva Vaishnava Raj Sabha, Sajan Mitabhuk, Bhaktisiddhanta,
Sajan Apramatta.

1919- 1920-Sajjanatoshani (22nd year) Articles:

Varshodghata, Sajan Manad, Sajjan Amani, Sajan Gambhir, Sajan
Karun, Sajan Maitra, Kal-Sanjnaya Nama, Shaukra and Vrttigata
Varnabhed, Karmir Kanakadi, Gurudas, Dasha, Dikshita.


Ill



1920- 1921-Sajjanatoshani (23rd year) Articles:

Hayanodghata, Aikantika and Vyabhichari, Nirjane Anartha (a
song "Man, tumi kisher Vaishnava?"), Sajan Kavi, Chaturmasya,
Pancho-Pasana, Vaishnava and ?tar Smriti, Samskar-Sandarbha,
Sajjan Daksha, Vaishnava Maryada, Sajan Mauni, Sri Murti-Seva
in Yogapith, Aprakrita.

1921- 1922-Sajjanatoshani (24th year) Articles:

Navavarsha, Savishesh and Nirvishesh, Meki and Asal, Samayik
Prasanga, Srimad Bhagavata, Smarta Raghunandan, Harinama-
Mahamantra, Sagunopasana, Nishiddhachar.

W-1922-Laghuvivaran of Shikshashtaka

1922- 25-Vaishnava-Manjusha-Samahriti (Encyclopedia)

Part I -Jan. 1922

Part II-May 1922
Part Ill-May 1923
Part IV-March 1925

1923- 1935-Srimad Bhagavata (with Gaurakishore Anvaya,
Svananda-Kunjanuvad, Ananta Gopal-Tathya and Sindhu-
Baibhav-Vivriti. Publication commenced from Sri Gaudiya Math
in 1923 in parts, and was completed on 12th December 1935).

W-1924, 24th Feb.-Pratisambhashan

Sri Chaitanya-Bhagavata-lst edition, published during the
Advent-Festival of Sri Gaurasundar; and 2nd edition with
Gaudiya Bhasya, completed on 29th May 1932

1924- 1933-Bhakti-Sandarbha (with Gaudiya Bhashya)

1924, April-Prameya-Ratnavali (with Gaudiya Bhashya)

1926-Sri Chaitanya Chandramrita and Nabadwip Shatak (by Srlla
Prabhodhananda Sarasvatl with prose order, Bengali translation
and Gaudiya Bhasya)

1926, Feb. -Address in Vyasa Puja (Abhibhashan)

Ed. -1926, Apr.-Vedanta-Tatvasar (by Sri Ramanujacharya, with


112



Bengali translation)

Ed. -1926, Nov.-Manimanjari

1927, Feb. 20-Sri Bhagavater Punaravritti

1927, Jan.-Feb. Sri Madhyacharya's Sadachar-Smriti (Bengali
translation)

1927, Jan.-Feb. Sri Nabadwip Dham Granthamala

1927, June 15-Sajjanatoshani Patrika or Harmonist (in English,
Sanskrit and Hindi)

1927-Sri Chaitanya-Bhagavata (English translation)

Ed. 1927-Prem-Bhakti-Chandrika (20 thousand, of Thakur
Narottama)

Ed. 1927-Sri Hari namamrita-Vyakarana (Grammar)

1928, Feb. 10-Pratinivedana
1928, Feb. 28-Vijnapti

Ed. 1928-Sri Chaitanya-Mangal (by Sri Lochandas Thakur)

1930, Feb. 18-Vyasa Pujaya Pratyabhibhashan

1931, Feb.-Hari-Bhakti-Kalpalatika (2nd edition, with Bengali
translation)

1932, Feb. 26-Varshik Abhibhashan

1932, Feb. 26-My Guru Puja (written in Madras, in English)

1932, May 29-Rai Ramananda (in English)

1932-Sri Brahma-Samhita (5th Chapter, translated into English)
W 1932, Aug. 24-The Vedanta-Its Morphology and Ontology
W 1932, Aug. 28-Relative Worlds
W 1932, Aug. 28-Paratantra-Jagaddvaya


113



W 1932, Sept. 3-Purushartha-Vinirnaya
W 1932, Sept. 11- A Few Words on Vedanta

JOURNALS

Edited by Shrila Sarasvatl Thakur

Gaudlya (weekly journal in Bengali established by Srlla Bhakti
Siddhanta Sarasvatl Gosvami Thakur, some of his articles
published in the same) 1st year:

W 1922-23-Sri Krishnajanma, Madhur Lipi, Loka-vichar,
Paramartha, Purana Samvad, Nitibhed, Ruchibhed, Sri Jiva
Gosvami, Gaudiye Priti, Durga Puja, Sharadiyavahan, Je Dike
Batas, Marute Sechan, Smarter Kanda, Vichar Adalat, Sevapar
Nam, Tridandi-Bhikshu-Giti, Sri Madhva Janma-tithi,
Varnashrama, Aprakat-Tithi, Braje Vanar, Samajik Bhed, Chyuta-
gotra, Nrimatradhikar, Bhritak Shrota, Vaishnava and abhritak,
Diksah-vidhan, Asurik Pravritti, Sri Baladeva Vidyabhushan,
Sadachar-Smriti, Panchar atra, Nigam and Agam, Sri Vishvanath
Chakravarty, Vaishnava-Darshan, Varnantar, Parichye Prashna,
Asatye Adar, Ayogya Santan, Ashudra Diksha, Pujadhikar,
Anatmajnan, Nija Parichaya, Vamsha-Pranali, Gaura-Bhajan,
Dhanya and Shyama, Tritiya Janma, Avaidha Sadhan, Baija
Brahmana, Prachare Bhranti, Bhagavata Shravan, Math Ki?,
Acche Adhikar, Sridharsvami, Vyavahar, Kamina, Shaktisanchar,
Varsha-Pariksha, Ekajati, Ihalok, Paralok

W 1923-24-Gaudlya, 2nd year:

Varshapravesh, Brahmanyadeva, Gurubruva, KirtaneVijnan,
Avirbhava-Tithi, Mather Utsava, Dikshita, Gosvamipad, Krishne
Bhogabuddhi, Gaudlya-Bhajan-Pranali, Sri Vigraha, Javala Katha,
Smarta and Vaishnava, Samajik Ahit, Prakrita. Bhokta Ke?,
Gaudiyer Vesh, Pratisambhashan, Sutravidvesh, Samayik
Prasanga

W 1924-25-Gaudlya, 3rd year:

Gaudlya Hospital, Samayik Prasanga, Bhagavata-Vivriti, Sri


114



Kulashekhar, Meyeli Hinduyani
W 1925-26-Gaudlya, 4th year:

Mahdur Lipi, Sri Vyasa Pujaya Abhibhashan, Prapta. Patra
(Rahasya), Ashrauta. Darshan, Vedanta-Tatvasarer Upodghata.

W 1926-27-Gaudlya, 5thyear:

Patravali, Darshane Bhranti, Vaishnava Shraddha-Vyavastha,
Alochaker Alochana, Nyakabokar Svarup

W 1927-28-Gaudlya, 6th year:

Man-Dan and Hani, Prati-Nivedana, Paramartha, Gaudapur, Asal
and Nakal, Ahaituk Dhama-sevak, Sarva-Pradhan Vivechanar
Vishaya, Bhai Kutarkik, Krishnabhakta Nirbodh Nahen, Prachin
Kuliya Sahar Nabadwip, Kaptatata Daridrata. Mul, Ekashchandra,
Punyaranya, Godaya Galad, Nilachale Srimad Satchidananda
Bhaktivinode

W 1928-29-Gaudlya, 7th year:

Samayik Prasanga, Virakta Jaghanya Nahe, Ami Ai Nai Ami Sai,
Vayvasadarer Kapatata, Hamsa-jatir Itihas, Patravali, Mantra-
Samskar, Bhog and Bhakti, Suniti and Durniti, Krishna-tatva,
Sridham-Vichar, Ekayan-Shruti and Tadvidhan, Pratichye
Karshna-Sampradaya, Vijnapti, Pancharatra, Nilachale Srimad
Bhaktivinode, Tirtha Pandharpur Manikyabhaskar, Vaishnava-
Smriti, Mahanta-Gurutatva, Boshtam Parliament, Alaukik
Bhaktacharitra

W 1929-30-Gaudlya, 8th year:

Sridham Maypur Kothaya?, Gaudachale Srila Bhaktivinode,
Satvata and Asatvata, Bharata and Paramartha, Paramarther
Svarup, Patravali, Vyasa Pujaya Pratyabhibhashan, Prachin
Kuliyaya Dvarbhet, Shikshaka and Shikshita, Vishayir
Krishnaprem Atmahara Pathak, Ashramer Vesh

W 1930-31-Gaudlya, 9th year:

Sri Bhaktimarga, Paramarthik Sanmilanir Sabhapatir
Abhibhashan, Bhavarogir Hospital, Jagabandhur Krishnanushilan,
Patravali


115



W 1931-32-Gaudlya, 10th year:

Gaudlya-Mahima, Patravali, Satshik-sharthir Vivechya,
Nimbabhsakar, Ajna and Vijner Narmakatha, Vaishnava-Vamsha,
Varshik Abhibhashan (read in Vyasa Puja in Madras), Confucius
Vichar, Patra

W 1932-33-Gaudlya, 11th year:

Ekadash-Prarambhika, Patravali, Vaishnave Jati-buddhi,

Madhukar Bhaikshya, Pradarshaker Abhibhashan Patravali,
Drishti Baiklabya, Amar Katha, Satshiksha-Pradarshani,
Krishnabhakti-i-Shoka-Kama Jadyapaha Krishne Matirastu

W 1933-34-Gaudlya, 12th year:

Kripashirvad

W 1934-35-Gaudlya, 13th year:

Sva-Para-Mangal, Vaikuntha and Gunajata Jagat, Bhogavad and
Bhakti

W 1935-36-Gaudlya, 14th year:

Navavarsha, Patravali, Bada Ami and Bhala Ami, Tadvan,

Vastava Vastu

Gaudlya, 15th year:

Hayanodhghata, Patravali

2. Daily Nadiya Prakash (a Bengali daily paper contains many
articles of Srlla Prabhupad) Mar. 1926

3. The Harmonist (English fortnightly, contains many articles of
Srlla Prabhupad). Ed. 1927

4. Bhagavata (Hindi fortnightly) 8th Nov. 1931

5. Paramarthi (Oriya fortnightly) 16th May, 1932

WORKS OF SRILA THAKUR BHAKTIVINODE
Edited by SRILA SARASVATI THAKUR

Sri Chaitanyopanishad (2nd edition), Sri Brahma-samhita (2nd
edition), Sri Brahma-samhita (English translation), Prem-Vivarta (4th


116



ed.), Bhajan-Rahashya (3rd ed.), Archana-Paddhati (3rd ed.),
Archanakan (2nd ed.), Jaiva-Dharma, Sri Chaitanya-Shikshamrita (in
English and Telegu), Srimad Bhagavad-Glta (with annotation of Sri
Vishvanath Chakravarty and Thakur Bhaktivinode, 3rd ed.),
Ishopanishad (2nd ed.), Sri Nabadwip Dham Mahatmya (3rd ed.),
Tatvamuktavali (2nd ed.), Tatvavivek (2nd ed.), Tatvasutram (in
Devanagari type), Sri Hari nama-Chintamani (4th ed.), SatkriyaSara-
Dipika and Samaskar-Dipika (3rd ed.), Life and Precepts of Sri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (4th ed.), The Bhagavat; Its Philosophy and
Theology (3rd ed.), Sri Chaitanya-Charitamrita (Amritapravaha
Bhashya, 4th ed.), Sharanagati (13th ed.), Saranagati (in English and
Tamil), Kalyan-Kalpataru (8th ed.), Kalyan-Kalpataru (in Oriya type),
Gitavali (7th ed.), Gitavali (in Oriya type), Gitamala (4th ed.),
Sanmodan-Bhashya of Shikshashtaka (3rd ed.), etc.

PRINTING PRESSES

/

Installed by Srlla Sarasvati Thakur

1. Bhagavata Press (Krishnanagar) 1914-15

2. Gaudlya Printing Works (Calcutta) 1923

3. Nadia Prakash Printing Works (Sree Mayapur) 1928

4. Paramarthi Printing Works (Cuttack) 1936

SRI CHAIT ANYAS FOOTPRINTS

/

Installed by Srlla Sarasvati Thakur

1. Mandar, 13th October 1929

2. Kanai-Natshala, 15th October 1929

3. Jajpur, 25th December 1930

4. Kurmakshetra, 26th December 1930

5. Simhachalam, 27th December 1930

6. Kovur, 29th December 1930

7. Mangalagiri, 3 1 st December 1930

8. Chhatrabhog, 2nd April 1934


117



Appendix II


Concluding Portion Of The Vyasa Puja Address "Humbler
Than A Blade Of Grass," Given February 24, 1924

"It is only when we have occasion to listen to the praises of the Supreme
Object of all praises from the Master and they react on our hearts, that
we may learn, about our utter worthlessness. Their profound humility
and obedience teach us that it is never possible to approach God and His
devotees except by such humble submission. If we learn to be arrogant,
we would surely be deprived of the service of God and His devotees for
good. 'There are persons who do not worship His devotees while
worshipping God. Verily, they are arrogant persons and not worshippers
of God.' In the matter of worship, God and His devotees are to be
equated. If the same devotion with which we worship God is not aroused
in our hearts to the feet of His devotees, we are rendered perfectly
worthless, and will have lived in vain.

"All of them are instructing me about the highest service of God. May
we be ever ready to sweep away from our hearts, by the rough
application of hundreds of pointed broomsticks, the wicked design of
desiring to be honoured above other persons by the devotees of God.

God will be merciful to us, and we shall be blessed by the gift of devotion
to His Divine Feet the very day that we are delivered from the evil
desire of seeking advantages and honours from others. A person is
relieved from all ineligibilities by being imparted fitness for the service
of God. Women, sudras and the rest look condemnable and
contemptible in the eyes of the world for their evil deeds. Even such
persons are enabled to attain the eternal good by noting the model
disposition of the devotees of God, who honour all persons without
requiring to be honoured, and by following their conduct and teaching.
Let us remember the text already quoted: 'There are those who worship
God but do not worship His devotees. Verily such persons are arrogant
sinners. They are not worshippers of God.'


118




"If we become arrogant after having adopted the path of devotion, if we
worship only God and disregard the worship of His devotees, we would
be put to manifold difficulties for our offence at the feet of the servants
of God; we would be overtaken by the greatest of all misfortunes by
being afflicted with apathy for the principle of devotion itself.

"Human life is meant solely for the attainment of the supreme good.

Why do I forget it? Why do I forget that I am the meanest and least of all
entities? The ambition to lord it over others, to be great, to be an
elevationist or Salvationist, is brought about when we allow ourselves to
fall victims to the temptations of the deluding energy of God. Such
ambition is petty and useless. If there is any use in curbing one's
hankering after becoming great in the eyes of the world, if there is any
use in gaining one's real health, it is imperative to accept the line of the
thought of the Vaisnavas.

"Those who are fit possess abundant power of devotion. They are strong.

I should not apply myself to find out the shortcomings of the Vaisnavas,
or to condemn the service of Lord Visnu or to seek to establish my own
point of view by neglecting the method by which I may be enabled to
serve the Lord and His devotees. No language can describe the havoc
that is wrought in human life by such arrogance. I make this submission
with all humility, ’May you kindly refrain from merely imitating the
conduct of the Vaisnavas. May you always follow their line of thought.’
There is no relationship for us other than with the devotees of Visnu.
Relationship with other persons can only aggravate the desire for
sensuous gratification.

"Many a year has now passed over me one by one. I at last realise that
there is no other help for me than the mercy of the holy feet of the
Vaisnavas. Every one of my acts is fit to be attacked. I pray to those, who
look down upon me, that if they consider that it is allowable for me to
follow the conduct and the teachings of the Vaisnavas, they would no
longer maintain that attitude. They will kindly impart to me the needful
strength and fitness to communicate their power to those who are stupid
and ignorant and devoid of all strength.

"One who serves Lord Hari counts himself as the least of all entities.

One is lifted to the highest order of the Vaisnavas when one can feel
himself the least of all. One can then proclaim out the message of the


119



highest devotion to Lord Hari.

"'The best of all persons deems himself to be less than all others.' Such is
the great dictum.

"It is necessary for the best to scrutinize one's ineligibility. Why should a
person be anxious to pry into the defects of other when he does not seek
to scrutinize his own conduct? Is this the disposition of the Vaisnava?

On the other hand, even those who are low in the scale of service may
attain the higher level. Let us remember the texts: 'Not to speak of
persons who listen to and remember with care the instructions of the
spiritual scriptures, even those who live by sin, viz. women, sudras,
Hunas, Savaras, and the birds of the air, can know God and prevail over
His deluding power if they follow the conduct of the devoted servants of
the Lord who covers all the worlds by His wonderful strides!

"'The acts and expressions of the Vaisnavas cannot be understood even
by the wise ...' The devotees are attached to the Lord who pervades the
worlds with His wonderful strides. Let us not be misled by the apparent
sight. Many a person has been liable to mistake the pebble for the pearl,
the snake for the rope, evil for good, by failing a victim to delusion by
relying on apparent sight. It is only when a person allows himself to fall
into the clutches of self-delusion that one's senses show their eagerness
for supplying the wants incidental to the phenomenal world by
supposing himself to be an inhabitant of the same. We should consider
well how we are to be delivered from being thus exploited by the
deluding energy. It will never bring us relief if we adopt the lordly
mentality for supplying our present inadequacies and for avoiding what
certain hasty observers have been pleased to dub as 'the slave mentality'
of the devotees of God. Such modes of thinking accelerate our march
towards the inferno by plunging us into the course of sensuous
indulgences.

"If we disregard or ignore the devotees of God for elevating ourselves, we
would thereby be cast into the prison of three dimensions and spring
toward inflation instead of contraction. 'I will be good; I will be cured of
my mundane desires; I will have real well-being'; this is the the proper
kind of judgement. But it is not at all laudable to entertain the contrary
thoughts: 'I will be great, I will gratify my malice by stopping the course
of the whole world.' It is by no means proper to set up one's superiority


120



against the worshipfulness of God's devotees. The path of hearing to the
Transcendental Word has been rendered devious by the
misinterpretation of the text 'A ham Brahmasmi' . I have listened to the
true interpretation of the text at the lotus feet of my divine master. It is
to this effect, "It is our eternal duty to chant constantly the Name of
Hari by being infinitely more truly humble than the smallest blade of
grass, more truly forbearing than even the proverbially patient tree, and
to honour others without seeking honour.

"What persuasive courtesy, what humility do these words express! How
great is the benefit, how great the good that we may have by listening to
such words! We have it from the Talaba Upanishad that those who
aspire to be masters of the devotees, who are the masters of God Himself,
are indeed most culpably arrogant. Srlmad-Bhagavatam significantly
declares, 'Let those who profess to know God brag of their knowledge,
but let me have nothing to do with such fellows. This is all I have got to
say in this matter.'

"Not one among the paths of this material world is a path of the service
of the Divinity. The idea that one should be master of God's devotees
leads to inferno. It is harmful to follow any worldly path. To follow the
devotees of God is the only path that leads to one's real good. Whatever
method is followed by the devotees is worthy of being cherished with
utmost love and reverence.

"Holding the blade of straw between my teeth I pray time and again for
this only boon, that I may be a particle of dust of the lotus-feet of the
most revered Sri Rupa GosvamI Prabhu. Let there be birth after birth
for us that we may walk in the path of the followers of Sr! Rupa by being
the particles of dust on the lotus-feet of the devotees of God. The root of
it all is humility or the due realisation of one's own ineligibility. If the
conviction of our unfitness for the service of God is revealed to us either
automatically or by the instruction of other persons, we are only then in
a position to appreciate the beauty of the lotus-feet of God's devotees. In
all the tasks of the average people of this world the idea that is
uppermost is how to promote the gratification of one's senses. If we
happen to be obsessed with the idea that it is the path of religion, we
would be prevented for good from becoming truly religious.

"All persons are accustomed to worship the Beautiful Feet of God. But


121



the conception that God is to supply our comforts and conveniences in
lieu of worship is worthy of a shopkeeper. That we are to receive some
other things in exchange for our worship is not the trend of thought of
the devotees of God. If one seeks to follow such a course, one will never
understand the nature of service to Krishna. God is full of the highest
well-being. It is no proof of one's goodness of judgement to pray to God
for the gratification of one's senses instead of the highest good. It should
be the duty of all persons to follow the line of thought that seeks to find
out how Krishna is to be served.

"'Oh my Lord, I pray to Thee for being employed in Thy service. I will no
more serve dogs and horses, iron and gold, men and gods. I have courted
my own destruction by engaging in their service. Thy service, O Lord, is
the only means of being delivered from this dire misfortune. But it is a
far cry to seek to obtain Thy service without serving those who have
dedicated themselves to Thy service. The service of thy devotees is
productive of greater good than any other method!

"We do not find God in this world. The devotees, who serve God, out of
their mercy show themselves to us. We should follow their conduct and
teaching. It is the only path to our well-being. Due to our meagre
education and small experience, to most of us the ideas and ways of
thinking of the devotees of God appear to be unedifying 'slave
mentality'. Let us not indulge in such profane ravings under the urge of
mental aberration. On the contrary, our line of thought should be, 'Let
the censorious people calumniate us to their hearts' content. We will not
mind them. Let us roll in the dust and forget everything in the ecstasy of
intoxication by excessive drinking of the strong and tasty wine of the
Love of Lord Hari.'"


Appendix III


Back to Godhead article by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, published in March 1952,


122




Vol. 1, Part IX, entitled, "Paramahansa Sree Sreemad Bhakti
Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj"


[The article begins with Srlla Prabhupada's poem, "Adore adore ye all ..."
and then the article ensues:]

Orii Vishnupada Sree Sreemad Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami
appeared in this mortal world in the year 1874 in February on the 6th as
the third son of Srlla Bhaktivinode Thakur known as late Kedarnath
Dutt in His early householder life. Srlla Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati was
known as Bimala Prasad Dutt in His early life and from His very
boyhood, inspired by His devotee father, lived a strict pious and religious
life. One instance in His early life will prove how much He was rigid in
His principle of religious way of life. The instance may be cited here as a
matter of course. Srlla Kedar Nath Dutta as an ideal Grihastha used to
worship Sree Sree Radha Govinda Vigraha at his house. As such one day
he purchased some good quality mangoes for the deity when Srlla Bhakti
Siddhanta Saraswati was a mere child. The child Bimala Prasad
pretending the childish nature ate up the mangoes without the
knowledge of his father. The father when he came to know that the
mangoes purchased for offering to the dieties at his house were
swallowed up by his child Bimala Prasad, he mildly rebuked Him and
warned Him also not to commit the mistake in the future. The child
Bimala Prasad took up this matter very seriously and as the proverb goes
that child is the father of future men, so He proved Himself then as the
future Acharya of the human community. From that day forward till His
departure from this mortal world He remembered that mistake which He
had committed in His early life and as a matter of self imposed
punishment, He never touched mangoes of any kind for His eating
purpose. In His later life He was so many times requested by His
thousands and thousands disciples to accept mangoes but He always
reminded of His childish so called mistake and always quoted the
instruction from the Ishopanishad that everything belongs to the
Almighty God. No body therefore accept anything in this world unless
the same has first been offered to Him (Almighty God).

Another instance of His early life may be stated here that when Bimala


123



Prasada was on the lap of his beloved mother His father Late Kedar
Nath Dutta was posted as Magistrate of Purl. The Car festival of Sree
Sree Jagannathji took place at that time. The house was situated just
near the main road through which the Car used to pass. So when the
Car was moving it stopped all of a sudden in front of the house where
Sri Bimala Prasad was on the lap of His mother. The Car of Jagannath
stopped and did not move with utmost endeavour of the pulling
devotees. The mother of Bimala Prasad took this opportunity and was
helped to get up on the Car for Darshan of the Deity with her saintly
son. The baby Bimala Prasad was then thrown up on the holy feet of
Sree Sree Jagannathji and at once the baby was blessed by the God as
some flowers fell down on the baby from the hands of the Deity. After
this incidence the Car began to move and every intelligent person
present there could understand that the child Bimala Prasad was not an
ordinary one. There are many such small but very significant instances
from His very childhood which indicated Bimala Prasad to be a future
great personality and it so happened that in His later age, He became the
most powerful Acharya in the line of Gaudlya Vaishnava Sampradaya in
the desciplic succession from the Madyacharya who was in the line of
Brahma Sampradaya coming down Brahma the Creator of this Universe.
There are four Sattawata or transcendental spiritual Acharya
Sampradayas or fundamental schools of Theism such as the Brahma
Sampradaya beginning with Brahma after his initiation from the
Personality of Godhead; the Rudra Sampradaya beginning from Sankara
or Mahadeva; the Shree Sampradaya beginning from Sreemati Luxmi
Devi the Eternal Consort of Sree Narayana and the Kumar Sampradaya
beginning from the Kumar namely Sanak Sanat Kumars. Sree
Madhyacharya belonged to Brahma Sampradaya, Sree Ramanuja to the
Sree Sampradaya, Sree Vishnuswami to the Rudra Sampradaya and Sree
Nimbarka belonged to the Kumar Sampradaya. All these four Acharyas
are bonafide preachers of the pure transcendental philosophy dealing
with the problems of this world, the living entities and the Almighty
God who is the Father of creation as well as the living entities who are
falsely trying to dominate over the creation and the controlling energy
known as the material Nature.

Sree Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj happened to be the


124



tenth generation in the line of disciplic succession from Lord Chaitanya

who accepted Srlla Iswar Purl as His spiritual Master. Srlla Madhabendra

/ /

Purl was the spiritual Master of Srlla Iswar Purl and He (Sri
Madhabendra Purl) belonged to be in the disciplic succession from
Madhyacharya who was direct disciple of Sree Vyasdeva. The Spiritual
Master of Srlla Vyasadeva was Srlla Narada Muni who was directly
initiated by Brahma the originator of the Brahma Sampradaya and
therefore my spiritual Master Sree Sreemad Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati
Goswami Maharaj belonged to the transcendental school of philosophy
of the Brahma Sampradaya linking Brahma to Vyasadeva; from Him to
Madhyacharya from Madhyacharya to Lord Chaitanya and from Lord
Chaitanya to Himself in a systematic principle as stated in Bhagwat
Geeta:


Ebam Parampara Praptam etc. [Bg. 4.2]

As a bonafide Acharya of the Brahma-Madhya-Gaudlya Sampradaya the
mission of Sree Sreemad Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami was to
re-establish the pure form of theism as propounded by Lord Chaitanya
in the line of His predecessors. Lord Chaitanya preached only the
teachings of Bhagwat Geeta in the most practical way to suit the present
environment created by the dark age of quarrel and fight. In the latter-
age calculated to be two hundred years before the advent of Srlla Bhakti
Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaja many pseudo-spiritualistic
parties in the name of Lord Chaitanya grew up like mushrooms to
exploit the noble sentiment of spiritualism of the innocent people of
Earth. Such pseudo spiritualistic parties deviated poles asunder from the
preaching of Lord Chaitanya because they were unfit to undergo the
disciplic regulations and as such they had mitigated a via-media
principle of rotten materialistic idea with pure spiritualism. They
misunderstood the highest form of worship contemplated by the Gopies
of Brindaban in the spiritual process with a materialistic idea of erotic
principle. As such the highest principle Rashllla stated in the Bhagwat
to be understood and relished at the stage of Parahansas was made a
plaything by such pseudo parties are known as the Oul, Baoul, Nera,
Karta Bhaja, Sain, Darbesa, Sakhi-vekhi, Sahajiya, Caste Goswamins,
Caste Brahmins and so on. These pseudo parties passed as the disciples


125



of Lord Chaitanya with their cheap nefarious activities and of all the
above parties the Sahajiyas and the Caste Gosvamlns became the most
obstinate-obstructors to the onward-progress of the universal movement
of Lord Chaitanya.

The Philosophy of Lord Chaitanya was that God is One without a
second. He is known as Sree Krishna but His incarnations such as Rama
Nrisingha are all identical with Him. The living entities or Jivas are
qualitatively one with Godhead but quantitatively they are innumerable
but eternal servitors of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
present materialistic activities of the Jivas are to be understood as the
acts of maya or illusion and therefore they are all waste of energy of the
human being. The energy of the human being as also of other living
being should therefore be directed under the bonafide regulations of the
Acharya in the line of Lord Chaitanya and as such He vehemently
protested against the principles of those pseudo transcendentalists now
passed in the name of Lord Chaitanya.

Srlla Thakur Bhaktivinode initiated the reformatory movement by
literary contributions while he was still engaged as a high Government
Officer. During his householder life and serving as a Magistrate he wrote
books of various descriptions in Bengali, English, Sanskrit & etc. to
present an actual picture of pure devotional activities of Lord
Chaitanya. Srlla Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj got
inspiration from his very Childhood all about Srlla Thakur
Bhaktivinode's movement. As a matter of fact out of all his other son's
Srlla Saraswati Thakur practically worked as the private secretary of
Srlla Bhaktivinode Thakur as such Bhaktivinode Thakur gave Him
(Srlla Saraswati Thakur) the transcendental Power of Attorney to
espouse the cause of Lord Chaitanya and so after Srlla Bhaktivinode
Thakur's departureSrlla Saraswati Thakur took up reins of that
reformatory movement.

The first and foremost task of Srlla Saraswati Thakur was to excavate
the holy birth-place of Lord Chaitanya at Sreedham Mayapur in the
district of Nadia in West Bengal. To substantiate this preliminary act of
His great future movement Srlla Saraswati Thakur had to face
tremendous difficulties offered by the caste goswamins at Nabadwip-
because they apprehended a lawyer in the initial movement. The caste


126



goswamins were exploiting and still are exploiting the religious
sentiments of the common people in the name of Lord Chaitanya and
presented themselves as so called relative and descendants of Lord
Chaitanya and Lord Nityananda. Factually Lord Chaitanya or for the
matter of that Lord Nityananda accepted nobody as their relative or
kinsmen who were not devotee of the Lord. On the contrary Lord
Chaitanya accepted Thakur Haridas, who happened to come out of a
Mohammedan family, as the Namacharya or the most powerful authority
for preaching the samkirtan movement which Lord Chaitanya
inaugurated so arduously.

Lord Chaitanya, as it is stated in the Bhagwat Geeta or in other
authentic scriptures, wanted to re-establish the Vaishnava Dharma on
the real basis of spiritualism. He never deprecated the natural caste
system but neither He approved of the birth-right caste system, which
has degenerated into slut of anachronism. Lord Chaitanya opined that
anyone who is well conversant with the philosophy of the Absolute
Truth Shree Krishna, never mind what he is either a born Brahmin or
Sudra or in the Ashram of a Sanyasi or Grihastha is perfectly competent
to act in the role of Spiritual Master. And He practically demonstrated
this fact during His preaching work.

The caste gosvamlns assisted by the other pseudo-transcendentalists
made a clique to check up the universal movement of Lord Chaitanya
and made a business of despatching those foolish followers to the
kingdom heaven after having drawing a lumpsum amount for this
priestcraft hooliganism.

Sree Sreemad Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj wanted to
check up this pseudo-spiritualistic activities of the so called followers of
Lord Chaitanya and present the actual thing for acceptance by the
general public religionists and modern philosophers for a critical study
of the sublime gift of Lord Chaitanya. It is the honest belief of Srlla
Saraswati Thakur that people in general, modern philosophers and
thinkers as also the religionists will be struck with wonder when they
seriously make a study of the gift of Lord Chaitanya.

What was thought by modern leaders like Gandhi and Rabindranath
was long before thought by Lord Chaitanya not as a public leader of
political aspiration but as the Father of all living entities. The


127



movement of Lord Chaitanya is generally known as the Samkirtan
movement which is a transcendental process of self-realisation by
removing the dust of materialism on the mirror of human intelligence.
The present problem confronting the human civilization is due to lack
of a proper introspection of the goal of human knowledge.


APPENDIX IV


Excerpts from the lectures of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.

/

1. Lecture given on December 9, 1968, the Disappearance Day of Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI Maharaja, in Los Angeles, California:

"So, today is the Disappearance Day of my Guru Maharaja. As I told you
that sadhava jlva va maro va. There was a nice story the other day that I
told you: that a sage is giving different kinds of blessings to different
types of persons. So, to a king's son, a prince, he blessed, raja-putra ciran
jlva, 'Oh, you are a king's son, prince, you live forever! And muni-putra,
the son of a saintly person, he blessed him, na jlva na jlva- You don't live!
Raja-putra ciran jlva muni-putra na jlva. And sadhu, devotee, he blessed
him, 'jivo va maro va-that you live or you die, as you like. And there was
a butcher. He blessed him, na jlva na maro, 'You don't die. You don't
live!'

"So these words are very significant. That I have already explained. Still
I am explaining. The prince is enjoying sense, that's all. He has got
enough facility for sense enjoyment. So his next life is hellish, because if
you indulge in sex life, then Krsna will give you facility to have sex life
three times in an hour just like the pigeons, the monkeys, the sparrows-
they are very sexually strong. You have seen it. So that facility is given.
So princely order they are after sense enjoyment, so he is blessed that
better you live forever, because after your death you do not know what is
going to happen to you. You are going to get a hellish life. Better you live


128




for some time, go on with your enjoyment. And muni-putra-na jiva-
brahmacarl, working under guidance, under strict disciplinary guidance
of the spiritual master. He is blessed na jiva, 'You better die, because you
are so trained to enter the kingdom of God, so why should you take so
much trouble. Better you die and go back to Godhead, na jiva. And a
devotee he blessed, jiva va maro va, 'My dear devotee, either you live or
you die, the same thing. And the butcher he blessed him na jiva na maro,
"You don't live. Don't die.' What is to do? His living condition is so
abominable. From the morning he has to slaughter so many animals, see
the blood stains, the ghastly scene. That is his livelihood. So, what a
horrible life this is. So don't live, and don't die also, because after death,
oh, he is going to be in so much hellish condition, nobody can describe.
So both life, living condition and death, after death, his condition is
very horrible.

"Anyway, apart from others, the devotee, for him, appearance and
disappearance-the same thing. Just like when my spiritual master
appeared in Jagannatha Purl. He was the son of a very big Government
Officer, Bhaktivinoda Thakura. He was Magistrate, Government
Officer, and in those days the magistrate is a big Officer in Government,
practically next to Governor. And Bhaktivinoda Thakura was in charge
of the Jagannatha Temple. That is the system in Jagannatha Purl; the
manager in charge of the temple is the District Magistrate. So, there was
Rathayatra Festival, and the cart was passing in front of Bhaktivinoda
Thakura's house (Bhaktivinoda Thakura's name was Kedaranath Datta.)
The car stopped before his house, and at that time Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura, a child in the lap of his mother ... the mother took
the opportunity of rising on the cart. She was a Magistrate's wife, so she
had the facility. Immediately people gave her way to going on the top of
the cart and placed the child on the Lotus Feet of Jagannatha. And
there were many garlands, one garland fell upon him, Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl-blessings. This was one of the ... there are so many other
things.

"When he was a child, two, three years old, he ate one mango fruit
which was kept for offering to the Deity, so his father mildly rebuked
him, 'Oh, you have done a very wrong thing. It was meant for the Deity
and you have taken it? You should not have done it.' The child was two


129



or three years old. He took it so seriously that never after that he took
mango. Whenever we offered him mango he said, 'No, I am offender. I
cannot take mango.' He was thinking like that. Never in his life he took
a mango. He was thinking that I have offended in my childhood by
taking the mango of the Deity. Well, this is the characteristic of the
acarya: they teach by their life's action. That one should be so much
determined that one should not be ... a child took the mango, there is no
offense. But he took that vow.

"Another instance in my presence: at that time, we were also young
men, and one of my God-brothers, his name is Dr. Oud Behari Kapoor,
he is now retired in Vrindaban, last time I saw him. He was also young
man, and his wife was also young. We were sitting together talking with
Guru Maharaja, and the girl proposed, 'My dear Master, I want to speak
with you.' Guru Maharaja said, 'Yes, you can talk whatever you like.' So
she said, 'I want to talk with you secretly, not in the presence of
everyone.' Guru Maharaja said, 'No. I cannot talk with you secretly. You
can talk in the presence of my all other disciples.' So, even that girl was
just like his grand-daughter by age calculation, he refused to talk with a
young woman in a secret place. These are the instances. In his life he
was always akanda-brahmacan. Bhaktivinoda Thakura had many other
sons, and was the fifth son. And some of his other brothers also, they did
not marry. And my Guru Maharaja, he also did not marry. From the
childhood a strict brahmacarl: Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI
Maharaja. And he underwent very severe penances for starting this
movement, world-wide movement. That was his mission.

Bhaktivinoda Thakura wanted to do this. In 1896 Bhaktivinoda Thakura
wanted to introduce this Krsna Consciousness Movement by sending
his, this book, Shri Chaitanya M ahaprabhu, His Life and Precepts.
Fortunately, that year was my birth year, and by Krsna's arrangement we
came in contact. I was born in a different family. My Guru Maharaja was
born in a different family. Who knew that I will come to his protection?
Who knew that I would come to America? Who knew that you
American boys will come to me? These are all Krsna's arrangements. We
cannot understand how things are taking place.

In 1936 ... Today is 9th December, 1968, that means 32 years ago in
Bombay ... I was then doing some business. All of a sudden, perhaps on


130



this date, sometime between nine or ten December, at that time Guru
Maharaja was indisposed, little, and he was staying at Jagannatha Purl
on the seashore. So I wrote him a letter, 'My dear Master, Your other
disciples, brahmacarl, sannyasl, they are rendering you direct service,
and I am a householder. I cannot live with you. I cannot serve you
nicely. So, I do not know how can I serve you.' Simply, an idea, I was
thinking of serving him. How can I serve him seriously? So, the reply was
dated 13th December, 1936. In that letter he wrote, 'My dear such and
such, I am very glad to receive your letter. I think you should try to push
our movement in English.' That was his writing, and, 'that will do good
to you and to the people who will help you.' And I was ... and that was
his instruction, and then in 1936 on the 31st December, that means just
after writing this letter, a fortnight before his departure, he passed away.
"But I took that order of my spiritual master very seriously, but I did not
think that I'll have to do such and such thing. I was at that time a
householder. This is the arrangement of Krsna. If we strictly try to serve
the spiritual master, his order, then Krsna will give us all facilities. That
is the secret. Although there was no possibility, I never thought ... But I
took it a little seriously by studying a commentary by Visvanatha
CakravartI Thakura on the Bhagavad-gita. In the Bhagavad-gita, in
connection with one verse: vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana,
Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura gives his commentary that we should
take up the words from the spiritual master as our life and soul. We
should try to carry out the instruction, the specific instruction of the
spiritual master very rigidly without caring for our personal benefit or
loss. So I tried a little bit in that spirit. He has given me all facilities to
serve him. Things have come to the stage that in this old age I have
come to your country, and you are also taking this Movement seriously,
trying to understand it. We have got some books now, so there is little
foothold of this Movement. Now on this occasion of my spiritual
master's departure, as I am trying to execute his will, similarly I shall also
request you to execute this same order through my will. I am an old man,
I can also pass away at any moment. That is nature's law. Nobody can
check it. So that is not very astonishing, but my appeal to you, on this
auspicious day, the departure of my Guru Maharaja, that at least to some
extent you have understood the essence of the Krsna Consciousness


131



Movement. You should try to push it on. People are suffering from want
of this consciousness ...

"... This Krsna Consciousness Movement is authorized, very important.
Now you American boys and girls, you have taken to this Movement.
Please take it more seriously, and that is the mission of Lord Caitanya
and my Guru Maharaja. And we are also trying to execute the will of the
disciplic succession. You have come forward to help me. I shall request
you all that I shall go away, but you shall live. Don't give up pushing on
this movement, and you will be blessed by Lord Caitanya and His Divine
Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Gosvami Prabhupada. Thank you very
much."

2. Lecture given on December 13, 1973, in Los Angeles, on the

s

Disappearance Day of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Gosvami Maharaja.

nama orin visnu-padaya krsna-presthaya bhu-tale
srimate bhaktisiddhanta-sarasvatiti namine

"Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl passed away from this material world on 31 st
December, 1936. So almost forty years passed. There are two phases:
prakata and aprakata, appearance and disappearance. We have nothing
to lament on account of disappearance, because Krsna and Krsna's
devotees, (not only devotees, even the non-devotees) nobody disappears.
Nobody disappears because every living entity ... as Krsna is eternal, it is
confirmed in the Vedic literature nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam, the
description of the Supreme Lord is that He is also nitya, eternal, and the
other living entities are also eternal. But He is the Chief Eternal. Nityo
nityanam cetanas cetananam. Qualitatively, there is no difference
between Krsna and the living entities. Quantitatively, there is
difference. What is the difference between nitya , the singular number
and nitya the plural number? The plural number nitya is subordinate,
eternal servants of the singular number nitya. Just like if you want to
serve somebody, the Master is also exactly like you. He has got two
hands, two legs, all the same sentiments. He also eats. Everything is
there in God. But the difference is the Master and servant, that's all.
Otherwise equal in every respect. So spiritually, appearance and
disappearance, there is no difference. Just like in material point of view,


132



if a person takes birth ... suppose you get a son born. You become very
happy. The same son, when he passes away, you become very unhappy.
This is material. And spiritually there is no such difference-appearance
or disappearance. Although this is the Disappearance Day of Om
Visnupada Sri Srlmad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, there is
nothing to be lamented, although we feel separation. That feeling is
there, but spiritually there is no difference between appearance and
disappearance. There is a song, Narottama dasa Thakura's song, ye anilo
prema dhana- can you sing that song, anyone? I don't remember exactly
the whole song. That is all lamentation.

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura brought this message to
deliver all over. Of course Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu expressed His

desire ... He predicted that all over the world, as many towns and villages

/

as are there, everywhere My Name will be known. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's Name, which is now attempted. Now actually. To execute
this will of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He said personally, bharata-bhumite
haila manusya-janma yara janma sarthaka kari' kara para-upakara. He
wanted that His Name should be brought all over the world in every
town and village. And who would do it? He asked that anyone that has
taken birth in Bharata-varsa, India, it is his duty, first of all, make
himself perfect by understanding the philosophy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and broadcasting, distribute. This was the duty of every
Indian ...

"So that advantage is there in India, by culture, by education. Therefore
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested that Indians, those who have taken
birth as human beings. He doesn't speak to the animals bharata-bhumite
haila manusya-janma. Manusya-janma means human, because without
being human beings, nobody can understand these things. The cats and
dogs, they cannot understand. A person whose behavior is like cats and
dogs, he also cannot understand. Therefore, He says janma sarthaka
kari', first of all, make your life perfect and then distribute this
knowledge. This is Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mission. He simply said,
but He was expecting, in the later days, His followers would do that.

That attempt was made by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura.
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, he desired that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
message should be accepted by East and West equally. And that both the


133



Indians and the Europeans and Americans they should dance together
in ecstasy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy. That was his desire.
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, he simply expressed the desire: when shall I see
this happening. Both these Eastern and Western people they are united
on the basis of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's cult and dancing together in
ecstasy. That was his ambition. This was ambition of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and this was ambition of Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Sri
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura took up this affair, business. He
wanted, first of all, every student, any disciple, every disciple, especially
those who are competent he requested that you take up this mission of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and preach in the Western countries. That was
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's first attempt. Before that, even the
acaryas, Rupanuga Gosvamls, they left literature, but they did not
attempt to preach practically. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura was
very, very anxious to preach this Caitanya cult in the Western
countries. That is his, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's special
contribution.

"So, when I met Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura ... It is a long story
how I met him. One of my friends, he dragged me. I was at that time a
nationalist, and manager in a big chemical factory. My age was about
twenty-four years. So one of my friends he asked me that there is a nice
sadhu, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, he has come to Calcutta. Let
us go and see. I was reluctant. I thought that there are so many sadhus, I
am not very much ... and because I had bad experience, not very good, so
I said that this kind of sadhu, there are many. You'll be glad to know,
that even at my young age, or early age, it was Krishna's grace, even
amongst my young friends, I was considered the leader. In my
schooldays, in my college days, in my private friendship. Somehow or
other I became their leader. And one astrologer, sometime he read my
hand. He said in Hindi, "Your hand speaks that your order will be
executed." Anyway it was Krsna's grace. I would not go, but their point
of view was that unless I certified that sadhu Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura, he would not be accepted. Therefore, he dragged me. So I went
to see Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura that day and on the first
meeting we offered our obeisances, as it is the practice. Immediately he
begins talking that you are all educated young men, why don't you take


134



up Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's cult and preach all over the English-
speaking public? Why don't you take up this path? So I argued with him
in some way. At that time I was a nationalist. So I told him that who will
accept our message? A dependent nation-nobody will care. In this way,
in my own way, in my younger days. But we belong to the Vaisnava
family, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda, Radha Govinda, that is
our worshipable Deities. So I was very glad that Radha- Krsna cult,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, that this sadhu is trying to preach. It is very nice.
At that time we had some talks. Of course I was defeated by his
argument, my argument. And then when it came out we were offered
prasadam, very nice treatment, the Gaudlya Math. And when I came out
on the street this, my friend, asked me, 'What is your opinion of this
sadhu?' And I said that here is the right person who has taken up
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's message and now it will be distributed. I was at
that time a fool, but I opined like this, and I accepted him as my spiritual
master immediately. No officially, but in my heart. That was in 1922.
Then in 1923 I left Calcutta on my business too, and I made my
headquarter in Allahabad. Allahabad is about five hundred miles from
Calcutta. I was thinking that I met a very nice saintly person. That was
on my thinking always. In this way in 1928 there was a Kumbha Mela. At
that time these Gaudlya Math people came to Allahabad to establish a
center there, and somebody else said, somebody informed them that you
go to that Prayaga Pharmacy. My drugstore was named that-Prayaga
Pharmacy. My name was also there. 'You go and see Abhay Babu. He is
religious. He will help you.' These Gaudlya Math people, they came to
me. They said, 'Sir, we have come to you. We have heard that you are a
very good man. We want to start a temple here. Please try to help us.'
Because I was thinking of these Gaudlya Math people, and I met a very
nice saintly person. As soon as I saw them, I was very much
engladdened. 'Oh, here are these persons. They have come.' So in this
way, gradually, I became attached to these Gaudlya Math activities. And
by the grace of Krsna my business also was not going very well. If
someone actually wants to be a devotee of Krsna-at the same time keeps
his material attachment, then Krsna's business is, He takes away with
Him everything material so that cent per cent he becomes, how do you
say, dependent on Krsna. That actually happened to my life. I was


135



obliged to come to this Movement to take up this very seriously.

"And I was dreaming that Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura is calling
me, 'Please come out with me.' So I was sometimes horrified. 'What is
this? I have to give up my family life? Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura is calling me. I have to take sannyasa.' Oh, I was horrified! But I
saw him several times calling me. Anyway, it is by his grace I was forced
to give up my family life and so-called business life. And he brought me
some way or other in preaching his gospel. This is a memorable day.
What he desired, I am trying a little bit, and you are all helping me. So I
have to thank you more. You are actually representatives of my Guru
Maharaja. Because you are helping me in executing the order of my
Guru Maharaja. [At this point in the lecture, Srlla Prabhupada cannot
continue due to strong ecstasy] "Thank you very much."

s

3. Lecture given on March 2, 1975, the Appearance Day of Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura.

"One hundred and one years ago Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura appeared on this day. Bhaktisiddhanta is gaura-sakti. Gaura-
sakti means empowered. Empowered by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sr!
Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted His mission to be broadcast all over the
world. He desired prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama, sarvatra pracara
haibe mora nama. Prthivite- all over the world, as many towns and villages
are there. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu predicted that His mission will be
spread. This prediction was made by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
personally 500 years ago. My Guru Maharaja attempted to fulfill the
desire of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sometime in the year 1918. He was
brahmacarl and Bhaktivinoda Thakura, his material father, he wanted,
actually he wanted-Bhaktivinoda Thakura. Of course everyone wanted.
But he wrote one small book Lord Caitanya-His Life and Precepts in
1896. And he presented that book to the McGill University in Canada.
He very much desired that the foreigners, especially Americans, would
join this Movement. That was his desire in 1896.

"And then in 1918 my Guru Maharaja started with this Mission one
institution known as Gaudlya Math. Perhaps some of you know the
name, Gaudlya Math. And he was trying to spread this message of Sri


136



Caitanya Mahaprabhu. And by chance or prediction, as you think, I was
taken to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura by one of my friends. I did
not want to go there, but he forcibly took me there. Yes. And he ordered
me that you preach the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu in English
language. This is very much essential. On the first meeting he told me
like that. That was my first meeting with him. At that time I was in
favor of Gandhi's movement. So I said that we are not independent,
subjugated, who will hear our message? Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura refuted my argument. I was very much pleased. I had so many
talks. But I was very much pleased to be defeated. That this so-called
nationalism or any -ism, they're all temporary. Real need is self-
realization. I was convinced, but at that time, although he wanted me to
immediately join him and spread this movement. At that time I was
married man, young man. I was married in 1918, and I got a son at the
time, 1921. And in 1922 I met him. At that time I was manager in a big
chemical factory. So I thought that I am a married man. I've got so many
responsibilities. How I can join immediately? It is not my duty. Of course
that was my mistake. I should have joined immediately, (laughter, jayal )

I should have taken the opportunity immediately. But maya is there. I
thought like that. So that's a long history ...

"1958 I took sannyasa and then I decided to take up the responsibility
that my Guru Maharaja (gave) ... I thought that my other God-brothers
are trying. I'm not capable to do it. They're better situated. But somehow
or other they could not do very much appreciative activity in this
connection. So when I was 70 years old I decided, "Now I must do it.
Execute the order of my Guru Maharaja." And thus this Movement was
started in 1965 from New York. And I was not very much hopeful
because it is a very difficult task. Just opposite the European and
Western culture. I came, when I first came, I had no money. I got a free
passage through some Indian steam navigation company. I came by ship.
When I was on the sea by Boston port, Commonwealth Port, I was
thinking that I have come here. I do not know what is the purpose,
because how the people will accept this movement. They're differently
educated, and as soon as I say, 'So, my dear sir, you have to give up meat-
eating and illicit sex and no intoxication and gambling.' They will say,
'Please go home!' (laughter) Because that was the experience. One of my


137



God-brothers, he went to London, and he had the opportunity to talk
with one big man: Marquis of Zetland. Marquis of Zetland was formerly
Governor of Bengal. At that time I was student. He was Scotsman, and I
was student of the Scottish Churches' College. So he came to see our
college, and he was standing in front of me in the second year class. He
was a very nice, good gentleman. So he proposed to my God-brother,
'Whether you can make me a brahmanaV My God-brother proposed, 'Yes.
We can make anyone brahmana, provided you follow these principles:

No illicit sex, no intoxication, no meat-eating, no gambling.'

"That Lord Zetland immediately replied, 'Impossible!' (laughter)

"So I was thinking that (laughing) I will propose something that is
impossible. Anyway, let me try! (laughter, cheers of jay a and Haribol!)
Now by the grace of Krsna and Caitanya Mahaprabhu and in the
presence of my Guru Maharaja, you are so nice boys and girls. In front of
Guru Maharaja you are chanting Hare Krishna mantra and you are
taking part in it very seriously. My Guru Maharaja will be very very
pleased upon you and bless you with all benefits. He wanted this, and it
is not that he is dead and gone. That is not spiritual understanding.

Even ordinary living being he does not die, na hanyate hanyamane sarlre.
And what to speak of such exalted, authorized persons like
Bhaktisiddhanta. He's seeing. I never feel that I am alone ...

"I had full faith that my Guru Maharaja is with me. I never lost this
faith. And it is fact. There are two words: vanl and vapu. Vanl means
words and vapu means this physical body, vanl is more important than
the vapu. Vapu will be finished. This is material body. It will be finished.
That is the nature. If we keep to the vanl , to the words of our spiritual
master, then we remain very fixed up. It doesn't matter. Just like
Bhagavad-glta. It was spoken 5,000 years ago. But if you keep to the
words of Krsna, then it is always fresh and guiding. Not that because
Arjuna personally listened to Krsna about the instructions of Bhagavad-
glta, therefore he knew it. That is not the fact. If you accept Bhagavad-
glta as it is, then you should know that Krsna is present before you in His
words in the Bhagavad-glta. This is called spiritual realization. It is not
mundane historical incidences ..."

4. Excerpts from a lecture given in Mayapur, India, on February 8, 1977,


138



/

the Appearance Day of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura.

"We should not remain vimildha. We should become intelligent. And to
make us intelligent Krsna comes. Krsna's devotees come. Some
messenger comes. And Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura is one
of the messengers of Krsna, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to preach Krsna
consciousness. And not only he preached, but he trained up many
disciples to preach this Krsna consciousness all over the world. By his
grace we are also endeavoring to do something with this ISKCON-
parampara system. So we should take advantage of this Vaisnava
mission. As Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as Prahlada Maharaja said, they are
very anxious. Vaisnava means para duhkha duhkhi. Vaisnava. Our Guru
Maharaja, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura-he is Vaisnava, cent per
cent Vaisnava. And he was para duhkha duhkhi. This is Vaisnava. He
criticized nirjana bhajana. He has personally written one song:

dusta maria! tumi kisera vaisnava

pratisthara tare, nirjanera ghare,
tava hari-nama kevala kaitava

'O rascal mind, what kind of Vaisnava are you. In a lonely place your
chanting of Hare Krsna is simply cheating.'

"It is a long song. Vaisnava means he doesn't want any material profit or
material opulence or material reputation. He doesn't want. That is ... But
in the material world everyone is busy for three things: material profit,
material reputation, and material adoration. This is not Vaisnava's
business. Vaisnava never cares for all these things. Vaisnava is always
thinking how to do good to this suffering humanity ...

"You must search out your real life-that is intelligence. That intelligence
is given by the Vaisnava. Therefore. Vaisnava has got a very very great
responsibility. My Guru Maharaja pointed out-Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura, pratisthara tare, nirjanera ghare! tava hari-nama
kevala kaitava. Formerly, people used to know that if I take a mala and
sit down in a secluded place, 'Oh, that is good. That is not bad.' But the
real business of Vaisnava is not for himself but for others. Just like the
example given about Rupa GosvamI:


139



nana-sastra-vicaranaika-nipunau sad-dharma-samsthapakau
lokanarin hita-karinau tri-bhuvane manyau saranyakarau

"Not personally. Personally is not high class Vaisnava. I shall become
liberated. I shall give up everything. Let me sit down and ... Sometimes
that is also good, but sometimes we also take it that to get cheap
adoration from innocent public, that here is a Vaisnava-he sits down.
No! My Guru Maharaja Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, he was not
that type of Vaisnava. That was his special gift. He wanted every one of
his disciples to go and preach the cult of Krsna consciousness."


Appendix V


Excerpts From Srlla Prabhupada's Letters

"When a disciple misunderstands a bonafide spiritual master, the master
regrets for his inability to protect the disciple and sometimes he cries
with tears in the eyes. We had an experience while my Guru Maharaja
was alive. One of his disciples who accepted sannyasa was one day
forcibly dragged by his wife. My Guru Maharaja lamented with tears in
His eyes saying that He could not save the soul." [67/11/16]

"I may inform you that you cannot be fool as you have humbly expressed
yourself. Better to remain an ever fool before the spiritual master. But if
a disciple is actually fool it reflects on the spiritual master. To think of
becoming a fool is the real qualification of the bonafide disciple. As soon
as one thinks that he has become the wiser man than the spiritual
master one is surely doomed. We should remain everlastingly a fool
before the spiritual master. Not artificially but feelingly and then we can
make real progress. Even my spiritual master a great scholar remained a
so called fool before his spiritual master Who was outwardly an illiterate
village fellow. So in the Absolute world the fool is also the master and
the master is also a fool in reciprocal exchange of dealings." [67/12/6]

"My Guru Maharaja never liked to open a Branch preaching center in a
place where there is less population. We are not meant for living


140




peacefully in a secluded place. We are meant for recruiting Krishna's
eternal servants and therefore a better populated place." [67/12/10]

"I may say that practical devotion is the secret to understanding the
Shastras. My Guru Maharaja used to say that for one who is not engaged
in devotional service, reading all the books is simply like licking the
outside of the honey jar. One who thinks the books is the thing is
content in this way. But we should learn the secret to open the jar and
taste the honey." [68-2-26]

"... my Guru Maharaj's opinion is that press is the brihat mridanga, or
the biggest, or the greater mridanga. The sound of press goes long long
distance, so the organization of press and literature and public sales,
should be our main business." [68/8/24]

"My father also trained me and instructed me to his best capacity, and he
prayed for me that RadharanI may be pleased upon me, and I think that
by my father's blessings and grace, I may have come to this position, and
I might have gotten into relationship with His Divine Grace, Orii
Vishnupada Sri Srlmad Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj.
So it is also Krishna's grace that I got a good father, and a good Spiritual
Master, and in my old age also, Krishna has favored me with so many
good children. So when I feel I see that Krishna is so kind upon me, so I
offer my obligations unto Him." [68/8/35]

"Regarding your question about my Guru Maharaj, I never told anyone
that He was one of the eight sakhis. I do not know how you got this
news. According to Vaishnava principles, nobody should think or
imagine somebody as Krishna, RadharanI or Their associates. Everyone
should aspire to follow the footprints of such associates. If somebody
thinks that somebody is Radha or Krishna that is not sanctioned by the
Vaishnava philosophy. So far as I know, my Guru Maharaj's position was
one of the assistants of the manjarls. For the present, it is better not to
discuss on these confidential things of a higher level, but you are always
welcome to put your genuine questions for an answer. Otherwise, how
will you know things as they are?" [69/1/27]

"So we should now organize in such a way that there shall be nice kirtan
and attempt for selling our publications. My Guru Maharaja indicated
that the mridunga and the press are the mediums of our missionary
propaganda activities, and we shall follow His path in the same way. We


141



must have large quantities of mridungas for vibrating in different parts
of the world and we must distribute our literature also." [69/1/64]
"Anyway, the actual fact is that the eight Copies are as good as Krishna
and Radharanl. Therefore, no Vaishnava will claim to be one of the
eight Gopies because that will tinge one with Mayavadl philosophy. If
some body says 'I am Krsna,' or 'I am Radha,' or 'I am one of the eight
Gopies,' that is against Krishna philosophy. My Guru Maharaja claimed
to be one of the sub-devotee assistants of the eight Gopies. Lord
Chaitanya also claimed Himself as servant of the servant of Krishna. So
even though you might not have understood, you can correct it now and
don't be disappointed." [69/2/12]

"My Guru Maharaja although he was Brahmacary, sometimes he used to
say that if I could beget Krishna conscious children I am prepared to
indulge in sex life a hundred times. The summary is sex life should be
utilized only for begetting Krishna conscious children-that's all."

[69/2/52]

"Thakur Bhaktivinode was not official Spiritual Master of Gour Kishore
das BabajI Maharaja. Gour Kishore das BabajI Maharaja was already
renounced order, Paramhansa, but Thakur Bhaktivinode while He was
even playing the part of a householder, was treated by Gour Kishore das
BabajI Maharaj as Preceptor, on account of His highly elevated spiritual
understanding and thus He was always treating Him as His Spiritual
Master. The Spiritual Master is divided into two parts; namely, siksha
guru and diksha guru. So officially Bhaktivinode Thakur was like siksha
guru of Gour Kishore das BabajI Maharaj." [69/5/ 1]

"In India, therefore, there are many akanda brahmacharies, and my
Guru Maharaj was the best brahmachary." [69/6/20]

"My Guru Maharaj used to say that just rise early in the morning and
then kick the mind with a shoe one hundred times. Then while going to
sleep, one should take a broomstick and strike the mind another one
hundred times. The mind is so restless, that it can be brought to
tameness only by the process suggested by Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati
Thakur. So you should try this process and stop the mind from running
away now and then. If you follow the process of Bhaktisiddhanta
Saraswati, naturally He will help you in controlling the mind and bestow
all His blessings upon you." [69/6/67]


142



"You have achieved a great blessing from my Guru Maharaja. My Guru
Maharaja had an ambition to publish the message of Lord Chaitanya in
all the languages of the world, and when He was present in India, He
published six magazines in five languages; one in Hindi, one in Assami,
one in Bengali, one in English, and one in Oria. Your Z muck Z ur
Gottheit is certainly a unique gift to me, and I shall ever remember it."

[69/7/11]

"I remember that my Guru Maharaj would often send young boys out to
sell literature of Krishna Consciousness, and if they would come back
having sold only a few issues, Guru Maharaj was very, very pleased. Now
you report that you have sold 300 issues of Back to Godhead in just a few
days, so I know that Guru Maharaj is very, very pleased with your work."

[69/7/74]

(To a God-brother) "I have also read specifically your articles on the
matter of acharyas, wherein on the 14th Paragraph I see the acharya
shall be entitled to nominate in writing his successive acharya. But we
do not find any record where our Srlla Prabhupad nominated any
acharya after Him. Different persons have interpreted on this point, and
every one of our God-brothers are acting as acharya, so this is a
controversial point which I do not wish to enter into while we are
proposing for cooperation. I think now we should cooperate fully for
preaching the Mission of Srlla Prabhupad. He very eagerly desired that
the message of Lord Chaitanya should be preached all over the world.
About 40 years before, Srlpad Bon Maharaj, guided by our senior old
Tirtha Maharaja were sent to London, and perhaps Gaudlya Mission was
established at that time. Since then, activities in foreign countries was
practically stopped altogether ... I started for New York in 1965. This was
out of my inspiration in receipt from Srlla Prabhupad, and it appears
that my attempt in the foreign countries has become successful to a great
extent. By my personal attempt I have established preaching centers
numbering about two dozen, beginning from Hamburg to Tokyo. I think
if my Godbrothers would have attempted similarly, preaching centers
would have been established all over the world by this time. Therefore, I
wish that Gaudlya Mission should send their preachers and establish
different centers in different parts of the world. That will fulfill the
Mission of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj." [69/8/38]


143



"Regarding publication of BTG No. 29, it is good that you are publishing
Morphology and Ontology of Vedanta by Guru Maharaj, 4 pages."

[69/8/45]

(To a God-brother:) "Srlla Prabhupad said that it was better to accept
some menial service for maintaining oneself then to get some money by
showing the Deities to the innocent public and being satisfied thereby ...
They are simply satisfied with some Maths, and they have forgotten the
preaching spirit of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj."
[69/8/46]

"I am pleased that the press arrangement is proceeding nicely, and you
will be pleased to know that my Guru Maharaj drew a picture in which
He gave great importance to the symbolic representation of the press
next to the mridunga. Press means publication of various types of books
and literatures and the mridunga means Samkirtan Party." [69/9/24]

"... so in the future we can form a central governing body for the whole
institution. Therefore the management should be done very cautiously
so that everyone is satisfied in their autonomous managing capacity. Of
course, the central point is the order of the Spiritual Master, and I am
very glad that you are trying to give importance to this aspect of
management. The difficulty is sometimes things are interpreted in a
manner dovetailing one's own sense gratification. I have got this
personal experience in my Guru Maharaj's institution. Different
Godbrothers took the words of Guru Maharaj in different
interpretations for sense gratification and the whole mission disrupted.
This is still going on for the last 40 years without any proper settlement.
I am always afraid of this crack, but I am sure if our aim is to serve
Krishna sincerely and the Spiritual Master simultaneously, that will be
our success." [69/10/24]

"Actually I am not worthy of any one of the words spoken by you but all
of them are due to my Spiritual Master Who was so kind to me. In fact I
am a worthless person because my Spiritual Master ordered me to take
up this work in 1922 but I did not carry his order until 1958, when I was
obliged to carry out His order by His arrangement only. This means
although I was not very enthusiastic to carry out His order He forced me
circumstantially to accept it. So this is His special mercy on me and I
always think about this with gratitude to this exalted personality coming


144



directly from Vaikuntha World and we had the great fortune to meet
Him. I think that is the only credit on our part that we happened to
meet Him by some 1 ajnata sukriti 1 or unknown auspicious activities. He is
so kind upon me that when I came to your country, where I was
completely unknown, He sent me some good souls like you unsolicited.

So I accept you all as assistants or representatives of my Guru Maharaj
Who is still helping me because I am so feeble and unworthy. Anyway,
the business which we have taken to work together is neither your
business nor my business as far we are personally concerned, but it is the
business of Lord Chaitanya and His bonafide servants like my Guru
Maharaj." [70/1/21]

(letter to Hanuman Prasad Poddar:) "As you want to publish a
comprehensive article in the Kalyan, I think it is proper to give you a
short history of my coming to the Western world.

"Sometime in the year 1922, when I was acting as manager of Dr. Bose's
Laboratory Ltd., I was fortunate enough to meet my Spiritual Master,

His Divine Grace Orii Vishnupad Paramhansa Paribrajakachary 108 Sri
Srlmad Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Prabhupad. On the very
first meeting with His Divine Grace, He asked me to preach the message
of Lord Caitanya. in the Western world.

"At that time, I was a young man and a nationalist, admirer of Mahatma
Gandhi and C. R. Dass. So I replied Him at that time, who would care
for the message of Lord Chaitanya while we are a subject nation? In this
way, I had some argument with my Spiritual Master, and at the end I was
defeated. But at that time, because I was already married, I could not
take His words very seriously.

"In this way, I passed on as a householder, but, by the causeless mercy of
my Divine Master, the order of preaching was impressed on my heart. I
was initiated regularly in 1933 at Allahabad, when Sir Malcolm Haley,
the then Governor of U.P., opened our Gaudlya Math branch there.
Then, in 1936, my Spiritual Master left this world leaving a message for
me that it would be better for me to preach in English language."

[70/2/12]

"You are doing so much for fulfilling the desire of my Spiritual Master so
you are indirectly the representative of my Guru Maharaj. He has been
helping me in this matter by sending so many young boys and girls,


145



otherwise who would help me in this mission while I came here empty
handed and without any friend. I can only pray to Krsna to take care of
you, otherwise I cannot repay your sincere service in my mission."

[70/2/47]

"The kindly words that you have used in this connection are very much
pleasing, but all the credit goes to my Guru Maharaj. He asked me to
take up this job as soon as I met Him in 1922; unfortunately I was so
worthless that I delayed the matter until 1965, but He is so kind that by
force He engaged me in His service; and because I am very much
worthless, therefore He has sent me so many of His nice representatives-
the beautiful American boys and girls like you. I am so much obliged to
you that you are all helping me in the discharge of my duties towards my
Spiritual Master, although I was so much reluctant to execute it. After
all, we are the eternal servants of Krsna, and by the Divine Will of Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur we are now combined together,
although originally we are born to different parts of the world, unknown
to one another." [70/3/22]

"Now everything is there and you are also experienced, therefore go on
opening branches as many as possible and preach Samkirtan movement
to your best capacity. Srila Bhaktivinode Thakur entrusted the
responsibility to my Guru Maharaj, and He also in His turn empowered
us to do the work." [70/3/24]

"In the London streets, introduction of Ratha Yatra procession, as well
as Lord Chaitanya's Birthday ceremony procession, and in the most
important part of the city, a Radha Krsna Temple-all these things are
great achievement of your London Yatra party, and personally I feel a
great credit for me because by such activities my Guru Maharaj is
certainly very pleased upon us. So whatever progress we are making by
the grace of Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj, we must stick
to them and make further progress." [70/3/53]

"My Guru Maharaj used to say that there is no scarcity of anything
within this world, the only scarcity is people are not aware of Krishna
Consciousness. The whole world is suffering for want of this great
benediction." [70/4/43]

"In the beginning I was seriously corresponding with Indian friends to
get some good mridanga players, but when I found it too difficult to get a


146



man from India some of my students were given the rudimentary lessons
in playing and simply by practice they are pulling on Samkirtan Party
everywhere. My Guru Maharaj used to say that in a foreign land where
you cannot speak the language with natives very nicely, what do you do
when there is a fire in your house just to get their help? In such
emergency one has to express himself somehow or other to his foreign
friends and get their help to extinguish the fire. But if he wants to learn
the language first and then talk with the foreign friends to get help,
then everything in the meantime would be finished." [70/4/47]

"My Spiritual Master, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakur, advised
me to preach the Krsna consciousness movement in the Western world
on my first meeting with him and I was preparing to come here in the
Western world since a long time. I met late Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru,

Dr. Radhakrishnan and the late Lai Bahadar Shastri for this purpose. I
was convinced by my Guru Maharaja that in the present status of
civilization there is not scarcity of anything except Krsna
consciousness." [70/7/31]

"After taking sannyas I was more engaged in writing my books without
any attempt to construct temples or to make disciples like my other God-
brothers in India.

"I was not very much interested in these matters because my Guru
Maharaj liked very much publication of books than constructing big, big
temples and creating some neophyte disciples. As soon as he saw that
His neophyte disciples were increasing in number, He immediately
decided to leave this world." [70/7/52]

"During my Guru Maharaj's time, even a person was coming from a
brahmana family, he was initiated according to the pancaratrika system
taking him to be a sudra. So the birthright brahmanism is not applicable
at the present moment. The sacred thread inaugurated by my Guru
Maharaj according to pancatrika system and Hari-bhakti-vilas by Srlla
Sanatana GosvamI must continue. It does not matter whether the
priestly class accepts it or not. When my Guru Maharaj Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl GosvamI Prabhupada introduced this system, it was protested
even by the inner circle of God-brothers or friends. Of course He had
actually no Godbrothers, but there were many disciples of Bhaktivinode
Thakur who were considered as God-brothers who protested against this


147



action of my Guru Maharaj, but He didn't care for it.

"Actually one who takes to chanting Hare Krsna Mantra offenselessly
immediately becomes situated transcendentally and therefore he has no
need of being initiated with sacred thread, but Guru Maharaj introduced
this sacred thread because a Vaisnava was being mistaken as belonging
to the material caste. To accept a Vaisnava in material caste system is
hellish consideration (narakl buddhi). Therefore, to save the general
populace from being offender to a Vaisnava, He persistently introduced
this sacred thread ceremony and we must follow His footsteps ... This
system introduced by my Guru Maharaj is a chance for all the members
of the society, scientifically based and applied, apart from the
exploitative sentiment of birthright 'caste' system, to become actually
situated on the transcendental platform." [70/11/28]

"My Guru Maharaj once told this story; one friend informed another
that one man has become the High Court Judge. 'Oh no,' he replied, 'No.
That cannot be right.' 'Yes, he is now a Judge,' said the first friend. 'I
have seen him sitting on the bench.' The second man replied, 'Maybe.
But I don't think he is getting any salary.' Such envious men will find
out some fault anywhere. There is no fault actually, but they will
manufacture some fault. That is their business. So many persons were
envious of my Guru Maharaj, but He was preaching and did not care for

them." [70/11/41]

"My Guru Maharaj used to say 'Don't worry about money. Do something
nice for Krishna and money will come.' So we should always be thinking
how to distribute the message of Krishna and surely He will give us
facility." [70/11/58]

"My Guru Maharaj has declared that the real life of a man is preaching.

If one has at all got any life in him then he will preach." [71/1/7]

"Yes, we were saved by Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Road. We shall always
expect to be saved by His Divine Grace Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati
Goswami Maharaj Prabhupada. Always pray to His Lotus Feet.

Whatever success we have had in preaching Lord Chaitanya's mission all
over the world it is only due to his mercy.

"Actually cottage life for chanting Hare Krishna Mantra is very nice but
because we are dealing with the Western people, Americans and
Europeans, they require some nice apartment. Therefore we have to


148



construct a nice house for them. My Guru Maharaj's policy was to give
nice facility to devotees so that they may chant Hare Krishna Mantra
peacefully and make advancement. But we cannot be luxurious. As far as
possible minimize the needs of our life but we shall not curtail the bare
necessities." [71/8/21]

"You are all helping me in pushing forward this mission of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, coming down by disciplic succession to my Guru
Maharaj. So whatever you have spoken, it is simply due to them. I am
simply the via media to receive them, on behalf of my Guru Maharaj,

His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Goswami Maharaj
Prabhupada." [71/8/29]

"The language of Krishna Consciousness is ever-fresh and we can
explain everything by it, just like my Guru Maharaj once lectured for
three months on one verse from Srlmad-Bhagavatam." [71/11/25]

"If Bill Prabhu holds a university post, then that is a very important
position for spreading Krishna Consciousness and he should try to keep
it as long as it will be beneficial in that way. My Guru Maharaj used to
say that anything material, if it is used in the service of Krishna, it is a
mistake to give it up." [71/11/27]

(Regarding the Pancha Tattva) "Yes, Srlnivas Pandit has sikha.
Vaishnava must have sikha. Advaita Prabhu has a full white beard. He
was an old man. He was practically older than the father of Lord
Caitanya. He was an elder gentleman in the town of Nabadwip, elder of
the brahmin community. All should wear Tulasi kunti beads, not less
than two strands. Three, four strands or my Guru Maharaj had five
strands." [71/11/28]

"Regarding your question about incense, Karandhar has just informed
me that our Spiritual Sky incense business is making now $1,000,000 a
year to spend for Krishna. How can that be maya? My Guru Maharaj
used to say, 'Anything material, if it is used for the service of Krishna, it
is a mistake to give it up.' Because I have understood this principle, he
used to appreciate me in front of my God-brothers. I have given this idea
all along-why you big leaders do not understand it?" [71/11/29]

"This kind of service is especially appreciated by Krishna, that some
devotees should take risk for His preaching work. And my Guru Maharaj
repeatedly requested his disciples to go out into faroff lands for


149



spreading the message of Lord Caitanya. Thank you very much for this."
[71/11/30]

"I am very glad that you are challenging all of these so-called swamis and
gurus. My Guru Maharaj appreciated devotees who boldly present our
Vaisnava philosophy. We must take advantage of every opportunity to
defeat these rascals and drive them away, so please continue this strong
attitude." [71/11/43]

"The fact is that I am the only one in India who is openly criticizing, not
only demi-god worship and impersonalism, but everything that falls
short of complete surrender to Krishna. My Guru Maharaj never
compromised in His preaching, nor will I nor should any of my students.
We are firmly convinced that Krishna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and all others are His part and parcel servants. This we must
declare boldly to the whole world, that they should not foolishly dream
of world peace unless they are prepared to surrender fully to Krishna as
Supreme Lord. [72/1/9]

"Your program of speaking in colleges and other places and getting paid
is very much liked by me; in this way, try to penetrate every school and
college and introduce our books profusely. That is nice you are taking
advantage of every opportunity for spreading Krishna Consciousness by
speaking on radio, attending engagements, etc. That is the method
recommended by my Guru Maharaj -now you are practically
demonstrating this fact with good results." [72/1/47]

"This was my Guru Maharaj's policy that we should remain in the big
cities in order that the maximum amount of people could take advantage
of our preaching." [72/1/54]

"So far personal association with the Guru is concerned. I was only with
my Guru Maharaj four or five times, but I have never left his
association, not even for a moment. Because I am following his
instructions, I have never felt any separation. There are some of my
Godbrothers here in India who had constant personal association with
Guru Maharaj, but who are neglecting his orders. This is just like the
bug who is sitting on the lap of the king. He may be very puffed-up by
his position, but all he can succeed in doing is biting the king. Personal
association is not as important as association through service." [72/2/31]
"Henceforward, anyone proposing to marry must produce some outside


150



income and live outside the temple, they know this in advance and be
prepared to carry such burden. Let them be married, but at their own
risk. I cannot sanction anymore. My Guru Maharaj never allowed, but
when I came to your country it was a special circumstance so I gave
concession, but I am not so much inclined anymore, so I shall not
sanction, but they may marry on their own risk of knowing that such
arrangement is always troublesome." [72/2/44]

"My Guru Maharaj said that this materialistic society is a society of
cheaters and cheated. Because people want to be cheated, men such as
you mention have become very popular." [72/3/17]

"My Guru Maharaj used to say that these literatures are the 'Brhat
Mrdunga,' that is to say, the big mrdunga, because like the mrdunga
which can be heard from a long distance, simply a few words can have a
tremendous effect on millions of people if they are propagated widely."

[72/5/47]

"My dear beloved Children,

"Please accept my blessings. I am so much pleased with your kind and
affectionate words on the occasion of my birthday anniversary on the
Nandotsava day this year (1972). My Guru Maharaj wanted me to spread
this Krishna Consciousness Movement in the western world, and you
are all helping in this great attempt.

"My Spiritual Master knew it that alone I could not do this great work.
Therefore He has very kindly sent you all to help me in this task. I
accept you therefore as representatives of my Guru Maharaj playing as
my affectionate disciples.

"It is said that child is father of man. Kindly therefore continue your
help in this great task and act as my young father and mother in my old
age. I am

Your ever well-wisher,

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami" [72/8/42]

"Yes, the preaching work is giving you new life. My Guru Maharaj
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati used to say pran ache var sehetu pracar, 'one
can preach who has got life.' So one who is preaching this Krishna
Consciousness Movement means he has got real life." [72/9/2]

"But if he buys a book that is the real successful preaching. That is the
certificate of my Guru Maharaja, if someone, brahmacarl, would sell a


151



one paise magazine, if one of our brahmacarls would go and sell a few
copies, he would be very very glad and say 'Oh, you are so nice.' So
distribution of literature is our real preaching." [72/9/46]

"I know that you are both best preachers and you will not stand by idly
and listen to any nonsense ideas or mayavadls. That is very nice. My
Guru Maharaj was also inclined toward his bolder preachers." [72/12/27]
"My Guru Maharaj said, it does not matter if anyone comes to hear. You
go on with your chanting. If no one hears you the walls will hear. But
this does not mean that we should sit down someplace and simply chant
Hare Krishna for our own benefit. We should be always anxious to save
the cripple minded people with the science of Krishna Consciousness.
This is the position of a Vaisnava." [73/2/10]

"When my Guru Maharaj was present even big, big scholars were afraid
to talk with His beginning students. My Guru Maharaja was called
'Living Encyclopedia', he could talk with anyone on any subject. He was
so learned-so we should be like that as far as possible. No compromise-
Rama Krishna, avataras, yogis, everyone was enemy to Guru Maharaj a-
he never compromised. Some God-brothers complained that this
preaching was chopping technique and it would not be successful. But
we have seen that those who criticised, they fell down. For my part I
have taken up the policy of my Guru Maharaja-no compromise. All
these so called scholars, scientists, philosophers who do not accept Krsna
are nothing more than rascals, fools, lowest of mankind, etc. [73/7/20]
"You have written so many nice things in praise of me but I think that
my Guru Maharaj is great, I am not great he is great. So sometimes by
association of the great one appears great. Just like the sun is great heat
and light and by reflecting the greatness of the sun's light the moon in
dead of night also appears great, but actually the moon is by nature dark
and cold, but in association with sun it has become accepted as great,
this is the real position. So I thank you very much that you are
appreciating my Guru Maharaja who wanted to preach Krishna
Consciousness all over the world, he is so great." [73/8/1]

"Some 50 years ago some Christian priest went to Vrindaban and
inquired from many residents why Krishna enjoyed Rasa dance with
others wife which is against the Vedic principle, but nobody could satisfy
him. On this point my Guru Maharaj said that Vrindaban is inhabited


152



by neophyte devotees. So we wish our temple will be able to reply
anyone in the matter of Krishna Consciousness, then many modern
philosophers and scientists will come to Vrindaban, that will be very
much prestigious." [73/8/17]

"My Guru Maharaj condemned living alone in a lonely place. He wrote
as follows:


dusta mana, tumi kisera vaisnava
pratisthara tare, nirjanera ghare
tava hari-nama kevala kaitava

"O rascal mind, what kind of Vaisnava are you. In a lonely place your
chanting of Hare Krishna is simply cheating."

And, Narottama Das Thakur says:

tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa
janame janame haya, ei abhilasa

"To serve the feet of the acaryas in association of the devotees is my
desire birth after birth."

"Why I have opened this Society? I was living with four children, and
now I have 4,000. There is no good in living alone." [73/11/11]

"Just like I have written in the first publication of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
'The spiritual master lives forever by His divine instructions and the
disciple lives with him', because I have always served my Guru Maharaja
and followed His teachings I am now even never separated from Him.
Sometimes maya may come and try to interfere but we must not falter,
we must always follow the chalked out path laid down by the great
acaryas and in the end you will see." [73/11/21]

"All are satisfied with a place for residence in the name of a temple, they
engage disciples to get foodstuff by transcendental devices and eat and
sleep. They have no idea or brain how to broadcast the cult of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. My guru maharaj used to lament many times for
this reason and he thought if one man at least had understood the
principle of preaching then his mission would achieve success. In the
latter days of my guru maharaj he was very disgusted. Actually, he left
this world earlier, otherwise he would have continued to live for more
years. Still he requested his disciples to form a strong governing body for


153



preaching the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He never recommended
anyone to be the acarya of the Gaudlya Math.... If Guru Maharaj could
have seen someone who was qualified at that time to be acarya he would
have mentioned. Because on the night before he passed away he talked
of so many things, but never mentioned an acarya. His idea was acarya
was not to be nominated amongst the governing body. He said openly
you make a GBC and conduct the mission. So his idea was amongst the
members of GBC who would come out successful and self effulgent
acarya would be automatically selected." [74/4/52]

"Now Bhadaraj and his wife have become expert doll makers. So give
him all facilities. Let all those with artistic talent assist him. I want very
extensive doll exhibits in every center. My guru maharaj used to spend
lots of money on doll exhibitions on Srlmad-Bhagavatam. So I am sure
that if we make doll exhibitions very prominent, many tourists and
visitors will throng in our temples." [74/9/41]

"Here at Mayapur my guru maharaj was printing one paper. It was selling
for only a few paise. Sometimes whenever one brahmacary would go to
Nabadwip and sell even a few copies, I would see my guru maharaj
become very much pleased. Even if the brahmacary was not a very
important member, my guru maharaj would become very very pleased
with him. He personally instructed me that books are more important
than big temples. At Radha Kund he told me that since constructing the
big marble temple at Bhag Bazar, there have been so many difficulties.
Our men are envious over who will live in which room. I think it would
be better to take off all the marbles and sell them and print books. He
told me this personally." [74/10/63]

"So far I am personally concerned, following the footsteps of my guru
maharaj Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakur Prabhupad, we accept
the principles of all the acharyas, although officially we belong to the
Madhva sampradaya. Our sampradaya is known as the Madhva Gaudlya
sampradaya. We find great shelter at the lotus feet of Sri
Ramanujacharya because his lotus feet are the strongest fort to combat
the mayavadl philosophy." [74/11/60]

"I blindly follow my guru maharaj. I do not know what is the result. So I
am stressing on this point of book distribution. He told me this
personally." [74/12/20]


154



"Besides that, in 1933, Bon was given the first chance to preach Lord
Caitanya's movement in London. He remained there about four years
and not a single person could be converted to become a Vaisnava, and
he was receiving regularly 700 Rs. per month for his expenditure, being
supported by the whole Gaudlya Math institution, and still, as he could
not do anything appreciable, he was called back by Guru Maharaja ..."
[75/6/8]

"No, you should not bother with all this nonsense. Astrology will not
save you at the time of death. My Guru Maharaja was a great astrologer
and astronomer, but he gave it all up. It is meant for the karmis. We
have no interest in such things." [75/6/32]

"He has written that people will want to learn Bengali just to read
Chaitanya Charitamrita. That was the prediction of my Guru Maharaj.
This is very enlivening." [75/9/51]

"I think if you can go on renting, that is better. Personally, I do not have
a financial brain. But my Guru Maharaja, he preferred rented house
rather than one's own house. At least India, a rented house is preferred
than possessing one and that is practical." [75/11/73]

"Your report of book sales is over encouraging. You are all becoming very
very dear to my Guru Maharaja. I started this movement by book selling.
I was never a beggar for money, but I was writing books and selling. My
Guru Maharaja very much liked my writing and he used to show others
in my absence 'Just see how nicely he has written, how he has
appreciated.' He encouraged me, and my God-brothers, they also liked
my writing. After I wrote that poem for Vyasa Puja of my Guru
Maharaja they used to call me Poet." [75/12/6]

"My Guru Maharaj also did not approve of seclusion. He used to say:
Dusta mana, tumi kisera vaisnava? Pratisthara tare, nirjanera ghare, tava
hari-nama kevala kaitava. 'My dear mind, what kind of Vaisnava are you?
Simply for cheap adoration you sit in a solitary place and pretend to
chant the Hare Krishna mahamantra, but this is all cheating.'" [76/1/58]


Appendix VI


155




s

Excerpts From The Essays Of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl

Thakura

"The only duty of sadhus is to cut away all the accumulated wicked
propensities of every individual. This alone is the causeless natural
desire of all the sadhus. Worldly people possess a double nature. They
express one kind of sentiment but internally cherish a different purpose.
Moreover they want to advertise this duplicity as a mark of liberalism or
love of harmony. Those who are unwilling to show any duplicity, wish to
be frank and straightforward, or in other words to exercise
unambiguously the function of the soul; such really sincere persons are
called sectarian and orthodox by those who practice duplicity. We will
cultivate the society only of those who are straightforward. We will not
keep company with any person who is not so. We must by all means
avoid bad company. We are advised to keep at a distance of a hundred
cubits from animals of the horned species. We should observe the same
caution in regard to all insincere persons.

"There was a time when Thakur Narottam was pleased to tell the plain
truth to many worthy persons who came of the highest lineage. Thakur
Narottam, in the eye of worldly people, had manifested himself just as a
member of an Uttaradiya Kayastha family. For telling the truth he
became the object of attack by bad people. Those who judge other people
by the testimony of their senses, are, as a matter of fact, maliciously
disposed. These persons, devoid of any sound judgement, began to find
fault with Thakur Narottam. Why was he, born in a kayastha family,
going to set up as a religious teacher of persons born in Brahman families
and also make them his disciples? When these accusations reached the
ears of Thakur Narottam he said that rather than provoke the
opposition of any person he would completely desist from instructing
anybody. Shri Ramakrishna Bhattacharya and Shri Ganganarayana
Chakravarti, who were disciples of Thakur-mahasaya, thereupon said
that if he gave up teaching the world will go to the dogs and there will
be a greater increase in the number of atheistical pashandas in the
world. Saying this, one of them put on the garb of a betel-seller and the
other attired himself as a potter. Meanwhile, the whole body of proud
pandits of the hostile community arrived at Kheturi with the intention


156



of defeating Thakur-mahasaya in open controversy. After their arrival
at Kheturi they went to the bazar and proceeded to the potter's shop for
purchasing earthen pots in which to cook their food. The potter began
to talk with them in the Sanskrit language. From there those pandits
went to the betel-shop for purchasing betel. The betel-seller also talked
with the pandits in pure Sanskrit. At this, those proud pandits thought
within themselves that it was a most wonderful country where even
potters and betel sellers could talk in the purest Sanskrit. Thakur
Narottam was the greatest person of such a place. It was impossible to
conceive how great a pandit he could be. Therefore instead of losing
their reputation by approaching him, it was better to leave the place
without delay. Thinking in this way those pandits hurriedly left the
village. Thus we find that those who obtain the protection of Truth are
always liable to be attacked."

2. From Search For Truth (The Sadhu):

"It is for this reason that the Bhagavata instructs us to turn over a new
leaf, 'Persons of good sense must entirely give up all association with bad
company and cultivate close association with the sadhus. There is no
doubt that the words of the sadhu possess the power of destroying the
evil propensities of one's mind. The sadhus in this way benefit every one
who associates with them.' There are many things which we do not
disclose to the sadhu. The real sadhu makes us speak out what we keep
concealed in our hearts. He then applies the knife. The very word
'sadhu' has no other meaning than this. He stands in front of the block
with the uplifted sacrificial knife in his hand. The sensuous desires of
men are like the goats. The sadhu stands there to kill those desires by
the merciful stroke of the keen edge of the sacrificial knife in the form
of unpleasant language. If the sadhu turns into my flatterer then he does
me harm, he becomes my enemy. If he gives us flattery then we are led to
the road that brings enjoyment but no real well-being."

3. From Search For Truth (Ramanuja and Yadavaprakasha ):

"Truth can never be served by the faculty that diverges from the Lord.
The service of Truth is the function of the soul. It is incapable of being
diverted from the Truth. It is causeless and uninterruptible. Truth is


157



identical with the Teacher of the Truth. There can be no knowledge of
the conclusions of the Vedas without undeviating service at the lotus-
feet of Shri Guru-deva. No one can be the Teacher of the Truth except
the devotee of God. This is not the dogma of irrational orthodoxy. It is
the real Truth. One cannot be the Guru though he be descended from
the highest lineage, be initiated in all sacrifices, has studied the
thousand and one branches of the Veda, if he be not a true Vaishnava.
"In ancient times there was a city called Kanchi in the South of the
country. In that city there lived a very famous professor whose name was
Yadavaprakasha. There is a tradition that at that time there was no
other professor in the whole of that part of the country who was his
equal in learning. Laksmandesika (Ramanuja) went to him for the
purpose of study. He resided with his teacher. He was devoted to his
studies with his whole heart. He was perfectly sincere in his conduct
towards his teacher. These excellent qualities soon attracted the
attention and captured the heart of his teacher. One day
Yadavaprakasha, following the interpretation of Shankar acharya, was
explaining the well-known text of the Chandogya that the two eyes of
God-head are red like the hind-part of a monkey. This caused intense
pain to the heart of Ramanuja. Ramanuja was at the time engaged in
tending the person of his teacher. He felt very much pained on hearing
the blasphemy against the Holy Form of God-head. The warm tears from
his eyes fell in drops on the back of Yadavaprakasha. This sudden fit of
weeping surprised Yadavaprakasha who asked Ramanuja about the cause
of his grief. Ramanuja then said that there was no necessity of
explaining the word 'kapyasam' in such a filthy and blasphemous manner
especially as the word possessed an excellent meaning. Was it not a most
highly offensive act to compare the Eyes of God Himself, the most
Revered Lord and Master of us all, with the worst part of the body of a
monkey?

"Yadavaprakasha was very angry on hearing these words of Ramanuja.

He reprimanded Ramanuja in most severe terms, 'How highly
impertinent for a mere lad to find fault with the interpretation of
Acharya Shankara! Was it possible that there could be any other
explanation of the text than that of the Acharya? 1 Ramanuja replied in
words that were expressive of modesty: 'Yes,' said Ramanuja, 'there is


158



another meaning of the text which augments the happiness of the
spiritually enlightened. Acharya's explanation is intended for deluding
those persons who are endowed with an unspiritual aptitude. I am telling
you the other meaning. Deign to listen to my words.'

"Thereupon Ramanuja offered this famous explanation of 'kapyasam' in
the text. 1 Kam ' means water. That which drinks water is 1 kapi 1 Kapi ' is
thus no other than the stem of the lotus, that which is placed on the
stem is 'kapyasam'. In other words, the two Eyes of that Supreme Person
are tinged with red like the undimmed lustre of the unplucked lotus on
its stem shining on the bosom of the blue waters.

"Yadavaprakasha was filled with the greatest astonishment on hearing
this explanation of the scriptural text. He felt most keenly the disgrace
of his defeat at the hands of his own disciple. Maddened with anger, he
plotted to do away with Ramanuja in secret.

"No teacher of undifferentiated cognition, or of utilitarian works, or of
any worldly state of union with the Supreme Soul (yoga) or of the
performance of activities resolved upon by oneself (vrata) or of
asceticism, or of magic, or of hypocrisy can really be designated as the
superior or Guru. They are all of them only triflers and being really very
light-headed indeed, are capable of being easily manipulated. They are
never the benefactors of the conditioned soul. They are on the contrary
the enemies of themselves as well as of all others."

4. From Search For Truth (The Boatman and the Thorns):

"There is a certain class of persons who are devoid of ordinary common
sense who say, 'The function of the servant in this world is the worst of
all. We have, therefore, no intention of practising any similar function
in the next world. We intend to be masters, to be objects of worship.' As
if the transcendental Realm is full of unwholesomeness and is tortured
by the triple quality as is the case with this world! If one is ignorant of
the true meaning of Vaikuntha one is liable to fall into this kind of
poverty of judgement. He is apt to attribute and imagine the existence of
the unwholesomeness of the perverted reflected image even in the
undisturbed substantive entity itself. Into that Realm where there is no
principle of limitation, no question of evil, where there is only unmixed
good, it is not our duty to carry from here anything that is productive of


159



evil. The sun is a luminous self-revealing entity. It is not necessary to
carry any lamp to the sun.

"There is a popular tale to illustrate such misconceptions. A certain
boatman was troubled by the idea that the operation of pulling at the
cord for towing his boat was a miserable job involving great hardships,
inasmuch as it required him to trudge painfully along most uneven
ground over thorn and brambles which often stuck into the bare soles of
his feet. Therefore, if he could manage to get rich somehow he would be
in a position to tug at his cord by bestriding quilts and mattresses which
he would take care to spread over either bank of the river. The boat-man
of the story was so foolish that he intended to carry all the miserable
pursuits of his poverty-stricken state into the condition of affluence.

The consideration that if he could get rich, it might not be necessary for
him to tug at the cord at all would not penetrate his foolish pate. Those
persons who are bent on journeying to the transcendental realm laden
with all the superstitions and material judgements of this world, who are
anxious to transport their sense-ridden logic to the transcendental
realm, who choose to imagine that in the realm that lies beyond this
world there can be any scope for the unavoidable slave mentality of this
world or any form of service which is any way characterised by the
factors of the unwholesomeness of this world, are indeed as stupid as the
foolish boat-man of the story. The function of the servant that prevails
in the realm of the Absolute, the servitude of the soul in the state of
freedom from the fetters of material bondage, is the natural condition of
the soul i.e., perfect subordination to his own proper nature
(swadhinata). By such servitude even unconquerable Godhead Himself
is subdued-the Supreme Lord of all Lords becomes our own."

5. From Nomenclature of the Absolute (Mathura People):

"We all should aspire to be Mathura people. We should have a proper
conception of spiritual Mathura instead of the mundane Mathura which
is the place of enjoyment of people with very low aspirations. Our
Sahajiya brothers think that they can have access to Mathura by paying
the railway fare. It is by surrendering ourselves to the Preceptor's Feet
that we can have an abode in Mathura. Otherwise, we cannot get an
entrance into the transcendental region. We should approach the Guru


160



who will confer on us the eight things, i.e., Name, Mantras, etc. The
Name is the Transcendental Sound and Mantras are incantations. The
Name is identical with the Named. The Mantra is required to reach that
situation in which the Name can be properly chanted. The son of
Shachi is the Supreme Lord Himself. Damodar Swarup is the head of the
Gaudlyas who are the transcendental servitors of Shri Krishna
Chaitanya. Rupa and Sanatana were sent to Mathura by Shri Krishna
Chaitanya to diffuse transcendental knowledge there. There are several
purls which can give salvation and among them Mathura is the most
supreme. Gosthavati signifies the place where Shri Krishna was feeding
His cows. (The sound 'Go' has various meanings such as knowledge, the
senses, the animal cow, etc.) Another holy spot is Radhakunda, a tank
where Shri Krishna got rid of the sin He had incurred by killing a cow
named Aristanemi. He killed Aristotelianism or the rationalistic process
of reasoning of this imperfect world. When Krishna wanted to join
hands with Radhika, Aristanemi came forward to disturb Him, because
Radhika was thought by many people to be the wife of a milkman named
Abhimanyu. This Aristanemi was the incarnation of mundane
knowledge, and Krishna killed him. For that act He expiated by taking a
dip in the Radhakunda. This kunda is the mental speculation of Radha.
The eternal land of our abode should be Radhakunda. By the border of
Radhakunda we should have our groves. There are millions of groves on
the banks of Radhakunda."

6. From The Pathway to Highest Blessedness (The Guru):

"God has said (S.B. 11.26.26): 'A truly intelligent person should shun evil
company but seek association with holy saints who, with their
instructions, gnaw the knot of the worldly attachments of our mind.'

The meaning is that for our true well-being we should always accept the
guidance of the true Guru (spiritual guide) and should not be misled by
pseudo-gurus. The Guru never accepts the preyah-pantha (way to
pleasure), but he is a shreyah-panthi (i.e., he follows the way to the true
well-being). He gives others (i.e., his disciples) the same instruction to
walk along the real path as he has received it from his own guru, of
course a true one. If a disciple asks permission of the Guru for drinking,
he is sure to disapprove of it and never to grant it. When the Guru does


161



not indulge the disciple in his prayer for things after his mind, he may
dismiss the Guru. Such disciples accept only the gurus that are ready to
supply fuel for their sensualism. Acceptance of a guru has become a
fashion now-a-days, not for the disciple's true well-being, but for getting
one's sensual pleasures approved of. Such appointments satisfy only the
social or family customs, like those of barbers and washers."

7. From Shrimad Bhagavatam and the Vaishnava Cult (Maya):

(From an interview with Pandit Shyamasundar Chakravarty, a leader of
the Independence Movement and at that time the Chief Editor of
Servant and Vasumati, an English magazine.)

Q: What is maya?

A: The derivative meaning of maya is what is measurable. Bhagavan is
the Lord of maya; He cannot be measured. Where there is an attempt to
measure God, there is maya and not God. 'M a' means 'not' and ' ya '
means 'what', i.e., 'what is not God' is maya. The maya as said in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam is not like the Satan in the Christian theology, a
separate entity from God, altogether another entity. According to the
Bhagavata school, maya is in Bhagavan in the condemned state (S.B.
1.7.4-5) in order to award condign punishment on the atomic sentience
(i.e. jivas) controllable by maya. In the Gita (7.4-5) God has said: "Earth,
water, fire, air, sky, the mind, intelligence and egotism-these constitute
My separate inferior potency, whereas other than this is My superior
potency constituting the jivas by which is supported the universe." This
inferior potency is the maya-potency. This inferior potency has been
stupefying the jivas that are apathetic towards God since before the
beginning of time and causing misunderstanding in them, sometimes
assuming the form of 'twenty-four items of entity' of Kapila, (the
originator of the Sankhya System), sometimes as the 'atom' of Kanada
(of the Vaiseshika System), sometimes also as Jaimini's principle of
'elevation' (in the Purva Mimamsa System), sometimes again as the
'sixteen objects' of Gautama (in the Nyaya System), sometimes as
'superhuman power and absolute oneness with God' of Patanjali (of the
Yoga system), and sometimes as the pretence of search after Brahman
(of the Shankar School).

Q: Why does such an event happen'?


162



A: Because the Jivas have free will of their own.

Q: Then how can this be reconciled with the teaching of the Gita which
says: "God stays in the heart of all the creatures and makes them whirl
round, in a machine, as it were, by the agency of may a”? ( Bg . 18.61)

A: This instruction in the Gita rather supports the above statement. It is
Shri Vishnu Who is God, the Controller of all beings. God gives the
jivas the fruit according to their performance of karma. Jiva is the doer
and God is the Giver. God's authority is seen in the giving of the fruits,
and governance of the cause and effect. So God is the Giver of the fruit
and the jivas, the enjoyers thereof.

Q: Why is there the independence of the jivas?

A: Jivas are the atomic parts of God, the vibhu-chit (Plenary Sentience).
The property of the sea, viz. water, is present in an atomic degree in a
drop too. Vibhu (or Over-Lord) God is totally independent, there is
independence in anu-chit-jiva (i.e., atomic sentience) too
proportionately.

Q: Is the proper use or abuse of the independence of jivas instigated by
God'?

A: If it had been God-instigated, then that would have amounted to the
service of God and not caused the jiva's forgetfulness about Him.

Q: Then how can the conclusion be arrived at, viz., 'everything depends
upon God's Will'? I am putting these questions not for the sake of
discussion. I am asking them, because you are a great scholar and a great
devotee at the same time. In the Hindi Gita of Shri Tilaka I read an
abhanga (panegyric to God) by Tuka-Rama, the sense of which runs
thus: "Oh God, if my karma brings me liberation, then what should I
have to do with You?"

A: The Shrimad-Bhagavatam has given a reply to this (SB 10.14.8): "He is
an heir to liberation, O God, who, feeling Your Grace in everything and
enduring the troubles caused by his own karma, bows down to You with
mind, speech and body i.e., wholeheartedly." He who has acquired fitness
for being freed from the world, understands that if the blame is laid at
the door of God, then, on account of the want of the tendency towards
doing service to God, liberation is never available, but only that person
can easily become the possessor of the position of liberation, who is
fortunate in having the tendency for the chit-service aroused in him,


163



and he can be more attracted towards God, considering all the troubles
and difficulties as His Grace.

Q: Then, are the sins that we commit due to God's Grace?

A: No, they are not. The predilection for sins has been given to test us,
in the same manner as money, paddy, a copy of the Shrimad-
Bhagavatam, etc. are placed before an infant at the time of the first-rice
ceremony to see what it takes according to its innate tendency. Before
the thread ceremony, too, the Acharya tests the tendency of the boy to
be initiated. God's cruelty is what the human intellect apprehends when
it is apathetic towards God. If one takes it to be a punishment, it is to be
understood that such a one is wanting in a serving temper and in
attraction for God. God is the Shelter for all. He sends many obstacles
and inconveniences to those who wish for shelter under Him, in order to
test their ardour and steadiness. For example, when the Vaidya
prescribes bitter and astringent medicines and distasteful diets, or the
doctor opens the abscess with his lancet, if the patient is displeased with
them, on the ground that they are cruel and not his well-wishers, his
decision is wrong, as he has taken his real friends to be enemies. The
divine potency, maya, has kept tempting objects as exhibits for alluring
me, just as the fishing hook or the net or the rat-trap or the chain, is set
to delude fish, rats, elephants, etc. The object is that I may thereby get
more and more entangled in the worldly meshes. Misled by these
deluding traps, sometimes I become a wanton performer of misdeeds,
sometimes a philanthropist doing good deeds, sometimes again consider
oneness with non-distinct Brahman as good for me, feeling a high regard
for the doctrines of Buddha, Shankaracharya or Kapila. Mayadevi has
placed, in order, alluring things according to the diverse temperaments
of the persons who are deluded by the tenets of karma or jnana due to
their having desires for things other than the Truth. Jiva will attain his
true well-being, when he engages himself in the accounts relating to
God; there is no other way thereto. God does not set up obstructions
against anyone, and He is not the destroyer of chetana-dharma or
sentience in him. It would have been an act of cruelty on His part, if He
had placed obstacles against this sentience. He is only informing the
sentient entities of what is the proper use of their sentience and what
are its abuses."


164



8. From Shrimad-Bhagavatam and the Vaishnava Cult:

Q: What benefit has Vaishnavism done to the world?

A: Politics will not be able to do even one part of a crore parts, in
thousands of eras, of the benefit that the Vaishnavas have done to the
world. We are not advising others to be such narrow sectarians as the
politicians are.

Q: How many people are there who know of Vaishnavism?

A: How many post-graduates are being turned out? How many Newtons
have been born? Is it a wise principle to give up the culture of science
because many Professor J. C. Boses are not being produced?

9. From Colloquies With Foreigners

(Interview with Mr. Willion Henri Jan Vandor Stock of Batavia, on
December 26, 1935)

Q: Do you know the Absolute gradually or at once'?

A: The knowledge of the Absolute can be had all at once, there is no
factor of time or space. If we are at all intent on knowing Him, we must
have some sort of objective reference for His subjective activity. Now we
are busy with worldly affairs: we think we are men and women. Instead
of doing so, we should be serving Him, and when He participates with
our pure selves, we will be set free from all the tempting influence of the
different things of Nature. We want that we should go back. Like a
shooting star, we have strayed out of the range of His attraction. Like a
comet, we are journeying without cessation. Our eternal condition is
that we are absolute infinitesimals, and as such, we should dove-tail with
the Absolute Infinity. The function between Him and us is Love. He is
the Lover. If He loves us, we will be taken back. If He has an apathetic
tendency towards us it is because we are averse to Him; and we will be
undergoing 84 lakhs of births and deaths, again and again. It would be
judicious for us that we should go back to the Absolute Infinity, and all
our engagement should be with Him, and not with anybody else.

10» From Colloquies With Foreigners

(An interview with Professor Johans, the Head of the Department of
Philosophy of St. Xaviers College):

Q: What are these four Vadas?


165



A: A chid-vada is materialism of the following nature as when one says, "I
shall be Indra, the king of heaven" or "I shall enjoy worldly pleasures" in
the vein of Charvaka, the Indian Epicurus, whose philosophy was that
pleasure was the highest good or again, "I shall borrow and drink and not
think of discharging the debt; I shall have convenient arrangements for
leading a comfortable life in this world and to be a greater enjoyer. I
shall acquire and preserve health; I shall make a proper use of the canine
teeth by eating fish and meat and vigorously manage the function of
youth" and so on. Achin-matra-vada is the name of the attempt to
annihilate the sentient existence, on the ground that achid-vada is only
temporal and the sentient existence is the unavoidable root of all
troubles and miseries. According to them the extinction of the sentient
existence is the most laudable and valuable thing, inasmuch as existence
is the root of all evils. Sakyasimha, Kapila, etc. were the propounders of
this doctrine. Chinmatra-vada is the name of the attempt to merge in
Brahman and thus destroy the anuch.it property of the jivas.
Shankaracharya and, before him, Dattatreya, were the propounders of
this doctrine. The different anuchetanamsas (jivas) of the Entire Chit
(God) remaining ever attracted by the Vibhu-Chetana (God) show love
towards Him. This is known as chit-vilasa-vaichitrya. Here the atma
(soul) is ever entirely engaged in the sportive activities with God. In it
there are no sins and no spiritual offences more heinous than sins, like
the covered state of the soul in achid-vada , the attempt to annihilate
atma and Paramatma as in achinmatra-vada, or spiritual suicide as in
chinmatra-vada. There are here the full unfolding, the full beauty and
the full coalescence of Paramatma and atma.

Q: You have just expounded very high philosophical truths which I shall
take a long time to digest.

A: Only time will not do. These truths should be listened to again and
again verbally from the mouths of true Acharyas. Some time ago Mr.
Chapman (of the Imperial Library) listened for two or three hours to the
philosophy of Shri Chaitanya Deva and at the end he admitted that
even for a scholar like him, the philosophy was extremely difficult to
enter into. So it cannot be understood without repeated hearings and
devout submission.


166



11. From Immanent and Transcendent (The Scorpion and the

Fire):

"What relish can there be in this decaying body, made up of the five
decomposable elements and full of putrescence and impurity? Shall we
not mind for a moment that this perishable and ever-changing body is
liable to wrath, ambition, illusion, fear, grief, envy, hatred, separation
from those we hold most dear, and association with those we hate? What
relish can there be for material enjoyments when we are exposed to
hunger, thirst, disease, decrepitude, emaciation, growth, decline and
death? The universe is tending to decay-grass, trees, animals spring up
and die. Mighty men are gone leaving their joys and glories. Beings still
greater than these have passed away; vast oceans have dried-mountains
have been thrown down, the polar star displaced, the cords that bind the
planets rent asunder; the whole earth deluged with flood-in such a world
what relish can there be for fleeting enjoyments? Living in such a world
are we not like frogs jumping in a dried-up well?

"To get rid of the deception of this false and treacherous seeming friend,
we should be sincerely suppliant before the Supreme Lord and water our
couch with tears; He will receive our prayers, have mercy on us and out
of His naturally loving-kindness, appear before us as the preceptor, with
all the proficiency in the scriptures and fully free from the hankerings of
the senses, to rid us from the clutch of the wicked mind, which has flame
all around and death within, to cut asunder all its knots and hitches and
to dispel all our darkness of the heart as an elephant runs away from the
darkest recesses of the jungle at the approach of the lion and the veil of
darkness is withdrawn from the surface of the earth at the advent of
Aurora. Then the mind will brood over its guilty woes like a scorpion
girt by fire." (Editor's note: When a scorpion is encircled by fire, he
stings himself and dies. So the wicked nature of the mind is destroyed by
the presence of the fire-like acharya.)

12. From the Real and Apparent (Divine Form):

"True, the light emitted by the Divine drives away all worldly ignorance
and misery and draws the purified soul unto itself. It is as if a great light
draws to itself one of its own rays gone astray. What happens to the


167



individual ray after it is merged in the great light, is left undescribed. No
vocabulary, it is urged, can carry us into the mystic depths of existence
inside the great light. This is the Semitic psychology represented by the
idea of the undefiinable personality of Godhead.

"Persons under the influence of such mentality are apt to be disinclined
to accept any concrete description of the form and doings of Godhead.
They prefer to make their obeisances to the zone of light and do not
consider it their duty to be over-curious or to peep into its hidden
secrets. But the realm of light, according to both the Koran and the
Bible, is inhabited by an infinite host of angels with bodies of light who
eternally serve Godhead and have an uninterrupted view of Him in His
Divine Realm. But beyond this admission no clue is supplied to the
details of the actual Divine Form or to describe or represent Him or His
angels to mortal ear or mortal eyes is condemned as an idolatrous
activity. It is also considered an offence to describe the Form and
Activities of Godhead even analogously in terms of mortal experience.
"This caution is salutory only within its proper limits. If it tantamounts
to end in denial of the Divine Form or to the assertion that Godhead is
formless, it strikes at the very root of all real spiritual activity. The
worship practised by avowed or covert impersonalists and abstractionists
is in principle indistinguishable from opposition to worship itself under
a hypothetical concern for the preservation of its purity. The fury
against idolatry often masks this sentiment of inveterate hostility to the
very principle of worship.

"An offence that is attempted against Godhead recoils on the offender
with ten-fold severity. If Godhead is denied His Form, the offender is
punished by addiction to the gross conception that the physical body
and mind are his own real form, and this conception leads its victim to
the vicious round of his worldly activities. Every item of such worldly
activity is the punishment for the denial of the corresponding activity of
the Lord. This is verily the hypocrites' 'Hell'. The prayers of
impersonalists offend the Lord more than the denunciation of His
avowed enemies."

13. From Real and Apparent (Free Existence ):

"The subjection of the soul to the laws of a foreign mistress is the result


168



of his own deliberate choice. He can easily revert to the state of free
existence by the exercise of the same freedom of choice. But free
existence does not mean mastery over others. Free existence does and
can mean only constitutional existence in the transcendent region. The
soul is a tiny particle of Universal-Soul. By his constitution he is subject
to the spiritual power of the Divinity of which he is a constituent part.
When he chooses to function in his own position in the spiritual system
and in subordination to the laws of the spiritual realm he is
constitutionally free. Whenever he chooses deliberately not to serve the
Absolute he thereby ipso-facto loses this natural or free state and is
compelled to submit to the Divine Will under pressure. This thraldom
he learns to prefer to real freedom by the tricks of the illusory Energy of
Godhead maya which creates a world by the Will of Godhead in which
Godhead makes Himself invisible for the benefit of the jiva. In this
world the jlva finds ample scope for his atheistic activities which only
result in ever increasing misery and disappointment."

14. From Real and Apparent ( The Voice of the Soul):

"The awakened soul says in effect to the mind and body, 'I am not

identical with you. I do not want what you require. I have so long
believed that I was identical with yourselves and that our interests were
the same. But I now find that I am really and categorically different from
you. I am made wholly of the principle of self-consciousness while both of
you are made of dead matter. Being matter you can act and be acted upon
by matter under the Laws of Nature. Nature makes and unmakes you,
but she has no power over me. I am not benefitted by your growth or
harmed by your decay. You grow and decay by the laws that govern your
relationships with this physical universe. Falsely identifying myself with
you, I find myself compelled to suffer pain and pleasure due to physical
vicissitudes that overtake you. I find myself unnaturally yoked to your
functions such as eating, drinking, producing thought etc. etc. and am
forced to believe them to be my own functions by which I am benefitted.

I shall of course have to stay with you as long as it is intended by
Providence that I should suffer the consequences of this unnatural
alliance with you. I shall permit you to do only what I consider to be


169



necessary for my well-being viz. getting back into my natural position of
free conscious existence unhampered by the unnatural domination by
longing for material enjoyment. I refuse to be any more a slave of the
sensuous inclinations of the mind and body.’"

15. From Spiritual Morality and Aesthetic Culture (Anecdotes

and A theism):

"In my college career in the Calcutta Sanskrit College, I had an occasion
to discuss with the then Principal of the College, the utility of theistic
culture. He appeared to cherish the view that a man can lead a moral life
independently of theistic culture. I took exception to the proposition
and asserted that morality divorced from theistic culture is only another
name for the doctrine of convenience and enjoyment, by which neither
individual nor social good can be attained.

"On another occasion, when I had been to the place of late Pandit Iswar
Chandra Vidyasagar, he said to us, 'You see my friends, when I have no
actual experience about Godhead or about His Real Self then, even
taking it for granted that He exists, if I make any statements about Him
and if He proves to be unlike what I say in all sincerity, I should
certainly run the risk of being taken to task by Him after my death. For
that reason, I do not like to enter into any discussions about God with
anybody, but only give ordinary moral instructions which I understand
and act up to myself.' A great theist who was present said to the Pandit,
'Why then have you written in your book, Bodhodaya that God is
without a form and of the nature of the principle of awareness? Have
you written this after you have actually seen Him? Or have you made
those statements by merely relying on some conventional doctrines?'
"Views like the above have passed current among the empiricists of all
times and to this day. While on the one hand they aver that as they
happen to know nothing about God, they should not hear nor discourse
about Him; on the other hand, in spite of this utter ignorance they are
always busy to declare Him to be an Impersonal Entity. To this I contend
that as they do not know anything at all about God, does it not become
them and all those who are equally ignorant to hear and discuss about
God with those who are well-versed in the line? It is indeed strange that
without giving a patient hearing to the adepts and without systematic


170



culture, under the pretexts of not being prepared to pass any judgement
thereon, we should run to do so according to our passing mental
predilections. Hidden atheism of this type has eaten into the vitals of
most persons. Mankind has a natural tendency towards this impersonal
idea of Godhead and it has spread among them like a contagious disease.
The idea may be traced to the innate desire of mankind to be freed from
all subjection to their Sole Governor, which can be effected if He can be
proved to an Entity without a Form. The attempt to make Him
Impersonal is an attempt to deny His eternal Rulership. The argument is
this, that we ourselves should possess eyes, ears, mouth, form, senses and
so forth, but Godhead must not have any of these; lest if He be furnished
with these He might be brought down to our level. Those who maintain
that when Godhead comes into this world He does so by putting on a
form of flesh but that His real self is Impersonal or in other words devoid
of transcendental Name, Form, Attributes and Pastimes, also throw off
the yoke of His Rule in a form that may pass undetected.

"Anarchy flows directly from the idea of there being no real Ruler over
the affairs of man. Moral order divorced from the idea of government
has no root. Sannyas, renunciation, self-restraint and any other
activities of a person which are not of the nature of acts of submission to
the Supreme Governor, though they may dazzle the eyes of the world by
their so-called excellence are nothing but sterile atheism. To pretend to
obey only moral rules irrespective of regard for Godhead, is like living in
a kingdom without acknowledging the authority of the king. Those who
are naturally inclined towards Godhead, even though they may appear
to the superficial observer to be vitiated are in reality most fully
established in moral living.

"All moral principles and those who enforce the moral order have their
seat in the devotees of God. So, if instead of making futile, dissociated
attempts for the cultivation of conventional morality, the attention of a
person be directed to the service of Godhead, all real morality and good
qualities will be found concomitant there-to. The order is not morality
first and devotion to God next. Devotion has always the first place, in as
much as every good is concomitant to it. Devotion is the meaning of all
morality, and real devotees of God are never immoral, not even in their
dreams."


171



16. From Spiritual Morality and Aesthetic Culture (Decorating

Dead Bodies):

"There cannot be a well imagined greater shock to the sense of beauty
than the attempt to deck a corpse. The endeavour to decorate the things
of this world by means of our mundane resources, is very similar to the
attempt to beautify a dead body. The result is a foregone conclusion. Our
aesthetic favourite of this moment is discarded at the next in favour of
others who also are replaced by others in their turn. The king who lives
in the most costly style has no more liking for the showy splendours of
his royal state, when they are not renewed, than the pauper has for his
old tattered rags. Familiarity breeds contempt for all things of this world
on account of their inherent ugliness which is found out on actual
contact.

"Poets and painters rely upon the equally futile resources of their limited
imagination for masking the inherent ugliness of the conditions of
mundane existence. Such imagining is not intended to lead us to the
reality. Goldsmith truly hit the function of the worldly poet and artist
when he declared that their wisdom consisted in innocently amusing the
imagination in this dream of life. The imagination does not want
anything that is not new and also not its liking, and its liking is ever
directed downward to its kindred point of the flesh, or the corpse. It is
not possible even for the imagination to deceive itself regarding the
naturally loathsome character of the dead body, the ultimate source of
its inspiration. The imagination of man is no more competent judge of
his real aesthetic needs than his scientific acumen. Both are directed to
mundane objectives which are essentially ugly and unwholesome.

"There can be no abiding value in poetry unless both the poet and his
surroundings are radically changed into entities that do not irresistibly
and unaesthetically drag us down to the most rotten things of this world.
It is no true poetry that seeks to disguise this fact by the external
embellishments of rhythm and vocabulary. Such ingenuity can only
amuse those to whom it is a novelty, and can do so only till the trick
does not grow stale. It is the logical nemesis of this state of things that
commerce is rapidly getting hold of every department of this make-
believe aesthetics. The tailor is making the man, because strangely


172



enough man wants to be made by him in seeming despair of any better
alternative."

17. From Brahma Samhita and the beginning of Transcendental

Plane of Amorous Love:

"The materialistic demeanour cannot possibly stretch to the
Transcendental Autocrat Who is ever inviting the fallen conditioned
souls to associate with Him through devotion or eternal serving mood.
The phenomenal attractions are often found to tempt sentient beings to
enjoy the variegated position which is opposed to undifferentiated
monism. People are so much apt to indulge in transitory speculations
even when they are to educate themselves on a situation beyond their
empiric area or experiencing jurisdiction. The esoteric aspect often
knocks them to trace out immanence in their outward inspection of
transitory and transformable things. This impulse moves them to fix the
position of the Immanent to an Indeterminate Impersonal Entity, no
clue of which could be discerned by moving earth and heaven through
their organic senses."


APPENDIX VII


Excerpts From The Books Of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

s

1. From the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

"These calculations are given in the authentic astronomy book known as
Surya-siddhanta. This book was compiled by the great professor of
astronomy and mathematics Bimal Prasad Datta, later known as
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI, who was our merciful spiritual
master. He was honored with the title Siddhanta Sarasvatl for writing
the Surya-siddhanta , and the title GosvamI Maharaja was added when he
accepted sannyasa, the renounced order of life." [Adz, Ch. 3, page 169]


173




"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura always used to say, 'Even at
the expense of all the properties, temples and mathas that I have, if I
could convert even one person into a pure devotee, my mission would be
fulfilled! [Adi, Ch. 7, page 73]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura explains in his Anubhasya, 'A
person who has attracted the attention of the spiritual master by his
sincere service likes to dance and chant with similarly developed Krsna
conscious devotees. The spiritual master authorizes such a devotee to
deliver fallen souls in all parts of the world. Those who are not advanced
prefer to chant the Hare Krsna mantra in a solitary place.' Such
activities constitute in the language of Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura, a type of cheating process in the sense that they imitate the
activities of exalted persons like Haridasa Thakura. One should not
attempt to imitate such exalted devotees. Rather, everyone should
endeavor to preach the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in all parts of
the world and thus become successful in spiritual life. One who is not
very expert in preaching may chant in a secluded place, avoiding bad
association, but for one who is actually advanced, preaching and meeting
people who are not engaged in devotional service are not disadvantages.
A devotee gives the nondevotees his association but is not affected bv
their misbehavior. Thus by the activities of a pure devotee even those
who are bereft of love of Godhead get a chance to become devotees of
the Lord one day. In this connection Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura advises that one discuss the verse in Srlmad-Bhagavatam: naitat
samacarej jatu manasapi hy anisvarah [10.33.31], and the following verse
in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu:

anasaktasya visayan yatharham upayunjatah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe yuktam vairagyam ucyate

[B.r.s. 1.2.255]

One should not imitate the activities of great personalities. One should
be detached from material enjoyment and should accept everything in
connection with Krsna's service." [Adi Ch. 7, pages 74, 75]

"Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI, at the time of his passing away
ordered all his disciples to work conjointly to preach the mission of


174



Caitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world. Later, however, some self-
interested, foolish disciples disobeyed his orders. Each one of them
wanted to become head of the mission, and they fought in the courts,
neglecting the order of the spiritual master, and the entire mission was
defeated. We are not proud of this; however, the truth must be
explained. We believed in the words of our spiritual master and started
in a humble way-in a helpless way-but due to the spiritual force of the
order of the supreme authority, this movement has become successful."
[Adi Ch. 7, page 77]

"The Vaisnavas are by far the greatest philosophers in the world, and the

s

greatest among them was Srlla Jiva GosvamI Prabhu, whose philosophy
was again presented less than four hundred years later by Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura Maharaja." [Adi Ch. 7, page 83]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura has explained the term
'Mayavadl' as follows: 'The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
transcendental to the material conception of life. A Mayavadl is one
who considers the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna to
be made of maya and who also considers the abode of the Lord and the
process for approaching Him, devotional service, to be maya. The
Mayavadl considers all the paraphernalia of devotional service to be
maya." [Adi, Ch. 7, page 25]

"Professional players and dramatic actors have no sense of devotional
service, and therefore although they can perform very artistically, there
is no life in such performances. Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura
used to refer to such an actor as yatra-dale narada, which means 'farcical
Narada.' Sometimes an actor in a drama plays the part of Narada Muni,
although in his private life he is not at all like Narada Muni because he
is not a devotee. Such actors are not needed in dramatic performances
about the lives of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Krsna. [Adi Ch.

10, page 258]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, who was previously also a
great astrologer, says that in the book named Brhaj-jataka and other
books there are directions for knowing the movements of the stars and
planets. One who knows the process of drawing a straight line and thus
understands the area of asta-varga can explain the auspicious
constellations." [Adi Ch. 13, page 103]


175



Translation


Having shown the verse to Svarupa Damodara with great wonder,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked him how Rupa GosvamI could understand
the intentions of His mind.

Purport

"We had the opportunity to receive a similar blessing from Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl GosvamI when we presented an essay at his
birthday ceremony. He was so pleased with that essay that he used to call
some of his confidential devotees and show it to them. How could we
have understood the intentions of Srila Prabhupada?" [Madhya Ch. 1,
page 48]

/

"In connection with this verse, which is a quotation from Srimad-
Bhagavatam [11.23.58], Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura says that
of the sixty-four items required for rendering devotional service,
acceptance of the symbolic marks of sannyasa is a regulative principle."
[Madhya Ch. 3, page 243]

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura explains that a mundane
person, being enriched by mundane opulences, must always know that
the transcendental opulences of the advanced devotees are far more
important than the materialistic opulences of a person like himself. A
materialistic person with material opulences should not be very proud or
puffed up before a transcendental devotee. If one approaches a
transcendental devotee on the strength of his material heritage,
opulence, education and beauty and does not offer respect to the
advanced devotee of the Lord, the Vaisnava devotee may offer formal
respects to such a materially puffed-up person, but he may not deliver
transcendental knowledge to him." [Madhya Ch. 8, page 161]

"Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave different persons different orders,
and consequently one should not try to imitate the behavior of Haridasa
Thakura without being ordered by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu or His
representative. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura condemns such
imitations in this way:

dusta mana! tumi kisera vaisnava ?
pradsthara tare, nirjanera ghare,

176



tava hari-nama kevala kaitava


'My dear mind, you are trying to imitate Haridasa Thakura and chant
the Hare Krsna mantra in a secluded place, but you are not worth being
called a Vaisnava because what you want is cheap popularity and not the
actual qualifications of Haridasa Thakura. If you try to imitate him you
will fall down, for your neophyte position will cause you to think of
women and money. Thus you will fall into the clutches of maya, and
your so-called chanting in a secluded place will bring about your
downfall.'" [Madhya Ch. 11, page 312]

"Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura points out that because there
are many permanent residents in holy places who do not precisely follow
the rules and regulations governing living in a sacred place, exalted
devotees have to go to these places to reclaim them." [Madhya Ch. 10,
page 115 ]

"Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura remarks, 'The impersonalists
imagine some forms of the Absolute Truth through the direct peception

of their senses. The impersonalists worship such imaginary forms, but

/ /

neither Srimad-Bhagavatam nor Sri Caitanya-caritamrta accepts this
sense gratificatory worship to be of any spiritual significance.'" [Madhya
Ch. 9, pages 102, 103]

[For Srila Sarasvatl Thakura's explanation of the mystery of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's cleansing of the Gundica Temple, please see
Madhya Ch. 12, pages 64-68-Ed.]

"Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura says that any Vaisnava who is
constantly chanting the holy name of the Lord should be considered to
have attained the second platform of Vaisnavism. Such a devotee is
superior to a neophyte Vaisnava who has just learned to chant the holy
name of the Lord. A neophyte devotee simply tries to chant the holy
name, whereas the advanced devotee is accustomed to chanting and
takes pleasure in it. Such an advanced devotee is called madhyama-
bhagavata, which indicates that he has attained the intermediate stage
between the neophyte and the perfect devotee. Generally a devotee in
the intermediate stage becomes a preacher. A neophyte devotee or an
ordinary person should worship the madhyama-bhagavata, who is a via
medium." [Madhya Ch. 16 page 194]


177



"The unwanted creepers have been described by Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl Thakura. He states that if one hears and chants without trying
to give up offenses, one becomes materially attached to sense
gratification. One may also desire freedom from material bondage like
the Mayavadls, or one may become attached to the yoga-siddhis and
desire wonderful yogic powers. If one is attached to wonderful material
activities, one is called siddhi-lobhi, greedy for material perfection. One
may also be victimized by diplomatic or crooked behavior, or one may
associate with women for illicit sex. Others may make a show of
devotional service like the prakrta-sahajiyas, or one may try to support
his philosophy by joining some caste or identifying himself with a
certain dynasty, claiming a monopoly on spiritual advancement. Thus
with the support of family tradition, one may become a pseudo guru or
so-called spiritual master. One may become attached to the four sinful
activities-illicit sex, intoxication, gambling and meat eating, or one may
consider a Vaisnava to belong to a mundane caste or creed ... one may
consider Vaisnavas in terms of birth, thinking one a brahmana
Vaisnava, a sudra Vaisnava, a mleccha Vaisnava and so on. One may
also try to carry out a professional business while chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra or reading Srlmad-Bhagavatam, or one may try to increase
his monetary strength by illegal means. One may also try to be a cheap
Vaisnava by chanting in a secluded place for material adoration, or one
may desire mundane reputation by making compromises with
nondevotees, compromising one's philosophy or spiritual life, or one may
become a supporter of a hereditary caste system. All these are pitfalls of
personal sense gratification. Just to cheat some innocent people, one
makes a show of advanced spiritual life and becomes known as a sadhu,
mahatma or religious person. All this means that the so-called devotee
has become victimized by all these unwanted creepers and that the real
creeper of bhakti-lata-bija has been stunted." [Madhya Ch. 19, page 344]
"It is certainly not good to write literature for money or reputation, but
to write books and publish them for the enlightenment of the general
populace is real service to the Lord. That was Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatl's opinion, and he specifically told his disciples to write books.
He actually preferred to publish books rather than establish temples.
Temple construction is meant for the general populace and neophyte


178



devotees, but the business of advanced and empowered devotees is to
write books, publish them and distribute them widely. According to
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, distributing literature is like playing
on a great mrdanga. Consequently, we always request members of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness to publish as many

books as possible and distribute them widely throughout the world. By

/

thus following in the footsteps of Srlla Rupa GosvamI, one can become a
rupanuga devotee." [Madhya Ch. 19, page 314]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta comments that saralata, or simplicity, is the first
qualification of a Vaisnava, whereas duplicity or cunning behavior is a
great offense against the principle of devotional service. As one
advances in Krsna consciousness, one must gradually become disgusted
with material attachment and thus become more and more attached to
the service of the Lord. If one is not factually detached from material
activities but still proclaims himself advanced in devotional service, he is
cheating. No one will be happy to see such behavior." [Antya Ch.2, page
179]

[From the chapter "The Chastisement of Junior Haridasa":]

Instructions from this Chapter

"Summarizing this chapter, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura
says that one should derive from it the following lessons. (1) Although
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is an
incarnation of mercy, He nevertheless gave up the company of one of
His personal associates, namely Junior Haridasa, for if He had not done
so, pseudo-devotees would have taken advantage of Junior Haridasa's
fault by using it as an excuse to live as devotees and at the same time
have illicit sexual connections. Such activities would have demoralized

the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and as a result, devotees would

/

have surely gone to a hellish life in the name of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. (2) By chastising Junior Haridasa, the Lord set the
standard for acaryas, or the heads of institutions propagating the
Caitanya cult, and for all actual devotees. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
wanted to maintain the highest standard. (3) Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu

instructed that a pure devotee should be simple and free from sinful

/

activities, for thus one can be His bona fide servant. Sri Caitanya


179



Mahaprabhu taught His followers how to observe the renounced order

/

strictly. (4) Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to prove that His devotees

are exalted and that their character is ideal. He kindly accepts His

faithful devotees and teaches them how much tribulation and

disturbance can be produced by even a slight deviation from the strict

principles of devotional life. (5) By chastising Junior Haridasa, Sri

Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His mercy toward him, thus showing

how elevated was Junior Haridasa's devotion for Him. Because of this

transcendental relationship, the Lord corrected even a slight offense

committed by his pure devotee. Therefore one who wants to be a pure

devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu should give up all material sense

/

gratification; otherwise, the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are
very difficult to attain. (6) If one dies in such a celebrated holy place as
Prayaga, Mathura or Vrndavana, one can be relieved of the reactions to
sinful life and then attain the shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. (7) Although a pure or faithful devotee may fall down, he
nevertheless ultimately gets the chance to go back home, back to
Godhead, by the mercy of the Lord." [A ntya Ch. 2, pages 205, 206]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura comments on this incident as
follows: Vaisnavas are all liberated persons, unattached to anything
material. Therefore a Vaisnava need not accept the dress of a sannyasl to
prove his exalted position. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the
renounced order from a sannyasl of the Mayavada school. Present-day
Vaisnava sannyasis, however, never think that by accepting the dress of
the sannyasa order they have become equal to Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In
fact, a Vaisnava accepts the sannyasa order to remain an eternal servant
of his spiritual master. He accepts the sannyasa order knowing that he is
unequal to his spiritual master, who is a paramaharinsa, and he thinks
that he is unfit to dress like a paramahamsa. Therefore a Vaisnava
accepts sannyasa out of humility not out of pride.

"Sanatana GosvamI had adopted the dress of a paramahamsa; therefore
it was inappropriate for him to wear the saffron cloth on his head.
However, a Vaisnava sannyasl does not think himself fit to imitate the
dress of a paramahamsa Vaisnava. According to the principles set down
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu (trnad api sunlcena ), one should always


180



think himself in the lowest stage, not on the level of a paramaharinsa
Vaisnava. Thus a Vaisnava will sometimes accept the sannydsa order just
to keep himself below the level of a paramaharinsa Vaisnava. This is the
instruction of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura." [Antya Ch. 13,

pages 146, 147]

/

"Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura says that all writers after
Vrndavana dasa Thakura who are pure devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and who have tried to describe the Lord's activities are to
be considered like Vyasa. Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura is the original
Vyasadeva in describing Caitanya-llla. and all others who follow in his
footsteps by describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes are also to
be called Vyasadeva. The bona fide spiritual master is called Vyasa,
because he is a representative of Vyasa. Worshiping the birthday of such
a spiritual master is called Vyasa-puja.

"The statement age vyasa kariba varnane is similar to a text in the
Caitanya-bhagavata [First Chapter, text 180] in which Vrndavana dasa
Thakura says:

sesa-khande caitanyera ananta vilasa
vistariya varnite dchena veda-vyasa

'The unlimited pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will be described
by Vyasadeva in the future.' Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura
says that these statements indicate that in the future, other
representatives of Vyasadeva will elaborately describe Lord Caitanya's
pastimes. The purport is that any pure devotee in the disciplic succession
who describes the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is confirmed to
be a representative of Vyasadeva." [A ntya Ch. 20, pages 285, 287-288]

CONCLUDING WORDS

"...we have now finished the English translation of Sri Krsnadasa

s

Kaviraja Gosvaml's Sri Caitanya-caritdmrta in accordance with the
authorized order of His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura GosvamI Maharaja, my beloved eternal spiritual master, guide
and friend. Although according to material vision His Divine Grace
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura Prabhupada passed away from
this material world on the last day of December, 1936, 1 still consider His


181



Divine Grace to be always present with me by his vanl, his words ...

"In this connection we may call to memory the time when I was
fortunate enough to meet His Divine Grace Srila Prabhupada, sometime
in the year 1922. Srila Prabhupada had come to Calcutta from Srldhama
Mayapur to start the missionary activities of the Gaudlya Math. He was
sitting in a house at Ultadanga when through the inducement of an
intimate friend, the late Sriman Narendranath Mallik, I had the
opportunity to meet His Divine Grace for the first time. I do not
remember the actual date of the meeting, but at that time I was one of
the managers of Dr. Bose's laboratory in Calcutta. I was a newly married
young man, addicted to Gandhi's movement and dressed in khadi.

Fortunately, even at our first meeting, His Divine Grace advised me to

/

preach the Cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in English in the Western
countries. Because at that time I was a complete nationalist, a follower of
Mahatma Gandhi's, I submitted to His Divine Grace that unless our

country were freed from foreign subjugation, no one would hear our

/

message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu seriously. Of course, we had some

argument on this subject, but at last I was defeated and convinced that

/

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's message is the only panacea for suffering
humanity. I was also convinced that the message of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was then in the hands of a very expert devotee and that
surely the message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would spread all over
the world. I could not, however, immediately take up his instructions to
preach, but I took his words very seriously and was always thinking of
how to execute his order, although I was quite unfit to do so ... in 1936,
just before His Divine Grace passed away at Jagannatha Purl, I wrote
him a letter asking what I could do to serve him. In reply, he wrote me a
letter, dated 13 December 1936, ordering me, in the same way, to preach
in English the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as I had heard it from
him ... In any case, when I had published Srimad-Bhagavatam, First
Canto, in three volumes in India, I thought of going to the U.S.A. By
the mercy of His Divine Grace, I was able to come to New York on
September 17, 1965. Since then, I have translated many books, including
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Teachings of Lord Caitanya
(a summary) and many others.

"In the meantime, I was induced to translate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta and


182



publish it in an elaborate version. In his leisure time in later life, His
Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura would simply read
Caitanya-caritdmrta. It was his favorite book. He used to say that there
would be a time when foreigners would learn the Bengali language to
read Caitanya-caritdmrta ... Now by the grace of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura,
it is finished ...

"I think that His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura is
always seeing my activities and guiding me within my heart by his words.
As it is said in Srimad-Bhagavatam, tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye.
Spiritual inspiration comes from within the heart, wherein the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, in His Paramatma feature, is always sitting with
all His devotees and associates. It is to be admitted that whatever
translation work I have done is through the inspiration of my spiritual
master because personally I am most insignificant and incompetent to do
this materially impossible work. I do not think myself a very learned
scholar, but I have full faith in the service of my spiritual master, His
Divine Grace Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura. If there is any
credit to my activities of translating, it is all due to His Divine Grace.
Certainly if His Divine Grace were physically present at this time, it
would have been a great occasion for jubilation, but even though he is
not physically present, I am confident that he is very pleased by this
work of translation. He was very fond of seeing many books published to
spread the Krsna consciousness movement. Therefore our society, the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, has formed to execute
the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His Divine Grace Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura." [A ntya Concluding Words, pages
319 - 321 ]

2. From the Srimad-Bhagavatam :

"Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the great preacher of the principles of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, has stressed the importance of association with
sadhus, pure devotees of the Lord. He said that even by a moment's
association with a pure devotee, one can achieve all perfection. We are
not ashamed to admit that this fact was experienced in our practical life.
Were we not favored by His Divine Grace Srlmad Bhaktisiddhanta


183



Sarasvatl GosvamI Maharaja, by our first meeting for a few minutes
only, it would have been impossible for us to accept this mighty task of
describing Srimad-Bhagavatam in English. Without seeing him at that
opportune moment, we could have become a very great business
magnate, but never would we have been able to walk the path of
liberation and be engaged in the factual service of the Lord under
instructions of His Divine Grace." [Canto 1, Ch. 13, pages 39-40]

"We had the opportunity to meet an avowed brahmacarl in the
personality of our spiritual master, Orii Visnupada Sri Srlmad
Bhaktisiddhanta GosvamI Maharaja. Such a great soul is called a
naisthika-brahmacari." [Canto 3, Ch. 12, pages 157-158]

"Kardama Muni desired to beget a child who would be a ray of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should beget a child who can
perform the duties of Visnu, otherwise there is no need to produce
children. There are two kinds of children born of good fathers: one is
educated in Krsna consciousness so that he can be delivered from the
clutches of maya in that very life, and the other is a ray of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and teaches the world the ultimate goal of life ...
After fulfilling his responsibility to produce a nice child, one should take
sannydsa and engage in the perfectional paramahariisa stage ... In the
same order as Kardama Muni, about one hundred years ago, Thakura
Bhaktivinoda also wanted to beget a child who could preach the
philosophy and teachings of Lord Caitanya to the fullest extent. By his
prayers to the Lord he had as his child Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
GosvamI Maharaja, who at the present moment is preaching the
philosophy of Lord Caitanya throughout the entire world through his
bonafide disciples." [Canto 3, Ch. 22, pages 226, 227]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura used to say, 'If I could
perfectly deliver even one soul back home, back to Godhead, I would
think my mission-propagating Krsna consciousness-to be successful.'"
[Canto 4, Ch. 12, page 189]

"We can definitely see that to advance in Krsna consciousness one must
control his bodily weight. If one becomes too fat, it is to be assumed that
he is not advancing spiritually. Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura
severely criticized his fat disciples." [Canto 4, Ch. 28, page 214]

"This [marrying disciples] may be astonishing to persons who are not


184



very interested in establishing daiva-varnasrama, the transcendental
system of four social orders and four spiritual orders. Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, however, wanted to reestablish
daiva-varnasrama. [Canto 5, Ch. 1, page 47]

"There is one easy weapon with which the mind can be conquered-
neglect. The mind is always telling us to do this or that; therefore we
should be very expert in disobeying the mind's orders. Gradually the
mind should be trained to obey the orders of the soul. It is not that one
should obey the orders of the mind. Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura used to say that to control the mind one should beat it with
shoes many times just after awakening and again before going to sleep.
In this way one can control the mind." [Canto 5, Ch. 11. page 398]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura used to say that in the
morning our first business should be to beat the mind with shoes a
hundred times, and, before going to bed, to beat the mind a hundred
times with a broomstick. In this way one's mind can be kept under
control." [Canto 5, Ch. 6, page 225]

"Srlla Rupa GosvamI has stated:

prapahcikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate

Everything, even that which is material, is connected with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore everything should be engaged in the
service of the Lord. Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura translates
this verse as follows:


hari-sevaya yaha haya anukula
visaya baliya tahara tyage haya bhula

'One should not give up anything connected with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, thinking it material or enjoyable for the
material senses.'" [Canto 5, Ch. 16, page 93]

"Srlla Jlva GosvamI says that although sanklrtana is sufficient for the
perfection of life, the arcana, or worship of the Deity in the temple,
must continue in order that the devotees may stay clean and pure. Srlla


185



Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura therefore recommended that one
follow both processes simultaneously. We strictly follow his principle of
performing Deity worship and sanklrtana along parallel lines. This we
should continue." [Canto 4, Ch.3, page 174]

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura did not like his disciples to
become very fat in the course of time. He would become very anxious
upon seeing his fat disciples become bhogis, or enjoyers of the senses."
[Canto 7, Ch. 13, page 100]

"Learned authorities in devotional life consequently advise that one not
endeavor to increase the number of temples and mathas. Such activities
can he undertaken only by devotees experienced in propagating the
Krsna consciousness movement. All the acaryas in South India,

s

especially Srlla Ramanujacarya, constructed many big temples, and in
North India all the Gosvamls of Vrndavana constructed large temples.
Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura also constructed large centers,
known as Gaudlya Maths. Therefore temple construction is not bad,
provided proper care is taken for the propagation of Krsna
consciousness." [Canto 7, Ch. 15, page 218]

"In this age, Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura introduced the
sacred thread ceremony for his Vaisnava disciples, with the idea that
people should understand that when one becomes a Vaisnava he has
already acquired the qualifications of a brahmana." [Canto 10, Ch. 7,
page 57]

"... The tendency of the mind is to accept and reject various activities
based on sense gratification. Therefore an intelligent person should
control the mind, restricting it from the illusion of seeing things
separate from Krsna, and when the mind is thus controlled he will
experience actual fearlessness." [Canto 11, Ch.2. text 38]

Purport

Purport

/

"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura has made the following
comments on this verse. 'Control of the mind is a result of living a life of
devotional service to the Lord. By the influence of fixed devotional
service, the accepting and rejecting mind can stop its thirst for sensory
enjoyment apart from Krsna. In transcendental Krsna consciousness


186



there is no contradiction, pettiness or lack of ecstasy. In other words, it
is not like a material object, which always proves temporary and
constantly miserable. Having forgotten Krsna, the conditioned living
entity is suffering the misdirection and perversion of his own so-called
intelligence. The living entities are fragmental parts of the supreme
shelter, Krsna, but have fallen from Krsna's kingdom of spiritual
pastimes. Because of forgetting the Supreme Lord, they become prone to
sinful life and turn their attention to dangerous material objects, which
fill them with constant fear. If one desires to subdue the mind, which is
constantly engaged in the duality of mental concoction, one must take
to the devotional service of Lord Krsna." 1 [Canto 11, Ch.2, pgs. 118, 120-
121 ]

"According to Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, 'One who has
experienced his own true identity understands that all things exist as
paraphernalia for giving ecstatic pleasure to the Supreme Lord. Thus
one becomes free from the separatist vision in which he sees the world as
existing for one's own enjoyment. In the transcendental state, whatever
a devotee sees reminds him of Krsna, and thus his transcendental
knowledge and bliss increase.'" [Canto 11, Ch.2, page 133]

"Srila Bhaktisiddhanta has stated, 'When childish people think
themselves maha-bhagavatas and act in defiance of the Vaisnava
spiritual master, such behavior simply holds them back from receiving
the mercy of the Vaisnava guru. Bewildered by false ego, these self-
proclaimed devotees gradually become fit to be ignored by pure devotees
on the intermediate platform and are cheated of the mercy that comes
from the devotees' satisfaction. Thus they become asadhu by constantly
committing offenses against the devotees who preach the holy name of
Krsna. Pure devotees, therefore, in all circumstances display indifference
to those who falsely imagine themselves to be visuddha-bhaktas, or pure
devotees of the Lord. This indifference is an excellent manifestation of
their mercy.'" [Canto 11, Ch.2, page 152]

3. From Nectar of Devotion:

"In the Middle Ages, after the disappearance of Lord Caitanya's great
associate Lord Nityananda, a class of priestly persons claimed to be the
descendants of Nityananda, calling themselves the gosvami caste. They


187



further claimed that the practice and spreading of devotional service
belonged only to their particular class, which was known as Nityananda-
varinsa. In this way, they exercised their artificial power for some time,
until Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura, the powerful acarya of
the Gaudlya Vaisnava sampradaya, completely smashed their idea. There
was a hard struggle for some time, but it has turned out successfully, and
it is now correctly and practically established that devotional service is
not restricted to a particular class of men. Besides that, anyone who is
engaged in devotional service is already at the status of being a high-
class brahmana. So Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's struggle
for this movement has come out successful.

"It is on the basis of his position that anyone can now become a Gaudlya
Vaisnava, from any part of the world or any part of the universe.

Anyone who is a pure Vaisnava is situated transcendentally, and
therefore the highest qualification in the material world, namely to be in
the mode of goodness, has already been achieved by such a person. Our
Krsna consciousness movement in the Western world is based on the
above mentioned proposition of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
GosvamI Prabhupada, our spiritual master. On his authority, we are
claiming members from all sections of the Western countries. The so-
called brahmanas claim that one who is not born into a brahmana family
cannot receive the sacred thread and cannot become a high-grade
Vaisnava. But we do not accept such a theory, because it is not
supported by Rupa GosvamI nor by the strength of the various

scriptures." [pages 47-48]

/*

4. From Sri Upadesamrta (The Nectar of Instruction):

"... Srila Rupa GosvamI states in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu [1.2.295]:

seva sadhaka-rupena
siddha-rupena catra hi
tad-bhava-lipsuna karya
vraja-lokanusaratah

"In the transcendental realm of Vraja [Vraja-dhama] one should serve

/

the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, with a feeling similar to that of His
associates, and one should place himself under the direct guidance of a


188



particular associate of Krsna and should follow in his footsteps. This
method is applicable both in the stage of sadhana (spiritual practices
executed while in the stage of bondage) and in the stage of sadhya (God
realization), when one is a siddha-purusa, or a spiritually perfect soul."
"Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura has commented as follows
upon this verse: 'One who has not yet developed interest in Krsna
consciousness should give up all material motives and train his mind by
following the progressive regulative principles, namely chanting and
remembering Krsna and His name, form, quality, pastimes and so forth.
In this way, after developing a taste for such things, one should try to
live in Vrndavana and pass his time constantly remembering Krsna's
name, fame, pastimes and qualities under the direction and protection of
an expert devotee. This is the sum and substance of all instruction
regarding the cultivation of devotional service.

'In the neophyte stage one should always engage in hearing krsna-katha.
This is called sravana-dasa, the stage of hearing. By constantly hearing
the transcendental holy name of Krsna and hearing of His
transcendental form, qualities and pastimes, one can attain to the stage
of acceptance called sravana-dasa. When one attains this stage, he
becomes attached to the hearing of krsna-katha. When one is able to
chant in ecstasy, he attains the stage of smaranavastha, the stage of
remembering. Recollection, absorption, meditation, constant
remembrance and trance are the five items of progressive krsna-
smarana. At first, remembrance of Krsna may be interrupted at
intervals, but later remembrance proceeds uninterrupted. When
remembrance is uninterrupted, it becomes concentrated and is called
meditation. When meditation expands and becomes constant, it is called
anusmrti. By uninterrupted and unceasing anusmrti one enters the stage
of samadhi, or spiritual trance. After smarana-dasa or samadhi has fully
developed, the soul comes to understand his original constitutional
position. At that time he can perfectly understand his eternal
relationship with Krsna. That is called sampatti-dasa, the perfection of
life.

'C aitanya-caritamrta advises those who are neophytes to give up all
kinds of motivated desires and simply engage in the regulative
devotional service of the Lord according to the directions of scripture.


189



In this way a neophyte can gradually develop attachment for Krsna's

name, fame, form, qualities and so forth. When one has developed such

attachment, he can spontaneously serve the lotus feet of Krsna even

without following the regulative principles. The stage is called raga-

bhakti, or devotional service in spontaneous love. At that stage the

devotee can follow in the footsteps of one of the eternal associates of

Krsna in Vrndavana. This is called raganuga-bhakti. Raganuga-bhakti, or

spontaneous devotional service, can be executed in the santa-rasa when

one aspires to be like Krsna's cows or the stick or flute in the hand of

Krsna, or the flowers around Krsna's neck. In the dasya-rasa one follows

in the footsteps of servants like Citraka, Patraka or Raktaka. In the

/

friendly sakhya-rasa one can become a friend like Baladeva, Srldama or

Sudama. In the vatsalya-rasa, characterized by parental affection, one

can become like Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda, and in the madhurya-rasa,

/

characterized by conjugal love, one can become like Srlmatl RadharanI
or Her lady friends such as Lalita and Her serving maids (manjarls) like
Rupa and Rati. This is the essence of all instruction in the matter of
devotional service." [pages 75-77]


Appendix VIII


Some Notes On The Gaudiya Sampradaya

What follow are some notes describing the chain of succession of our

/

Gaudiya sampradaya since the time of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. After
/ /

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's disappearance in 1534, Srlla Svarupa
Damodara GosvamI disappeared almost immediately afterwards, and the
Six Gosvamls of Vrndavana remained as the leaders of the Gaudiya

sampradaya in Northern India. They wrote many important books

/

establishing the philosophy taught by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu on an
unshakable Vedic theological basis. They elaborately researched all the
scriptures, established many holy places and temples and initiated
disciples.


190




Lord Nityananda was naturally the leader of the Vaisnavas in Bengal,
but after His disappearance, Mother Jahnavl, His eternal consort and
Vlrabhadra, His son, became the leaders of the Vaisnavas there. They
had many followers and disciples, as did the gopalas, the followers of
Lord Nityananda. There were also many followers of Srila Advaita
Acarya.

The following dates on the advent and ascension of the Six Gosvamls of
Vrndavana were given in the Sajjanatoshani Vol. II, edited by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura in 1882:

Srila Sanatana GosvamI appeared in the year 1410 Sakabda or 1488 A.D.
and disappeared in 1480 Sakabda or 1558 A.D. Srila Rupa GosvamI
appeared in 1411 Sakabda or 1489 A.D. and disappeared on I486 Sakabda
or 1564 A.D. Raghunatha dasa GosvamI appeared in 1417 Sakabda or
1495 A.D. and disappeared on 1493 Sakabda or 1571 A.D. Srila Gopala

Bhatta GosvamI appeared in 1425 Sakabda or 1503 A.D. and disappeared

/ /

in 1500 Sakabda or 1578 A.D. Srila Raghunatha Bhatta GosvamI
appeared in 1427 Sakabda or 1505 A.D. and disappeared in 1501 Sakabda
or 1579 A.D. Srila Jlva GosvamI appeared in 1435 Sakabda or 1513 A.D.
and disappeared in 1520 Sakabda or 1598 A.D.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advented Himself on February 18, 1486 A.D.
and remained on the earth for 48 years, which would mean He
disappeared approximately in 1534. All of the Gosvamls remained for
some time after that. Sanatana was the first to ascend twenty-four years
later in 1558, followed six years later by Rupa GosvamI, followed seven
years after that by Raghunatha dasa GosvamI, followed seven years after
that by Gopala Bhatta GosvamI, followed one year after that by
Raghunatha Bhatta GosvamI. It is mentioned that the brother of Rupa
and Sanatana Gosvamls, Anupama, the father of Srila Jlva GosvamI
disappeared in 1436 Sakabda, which means that Srila Jlva GosvamI was
only several years old at the most when he became orphaned. This date
of Anupama's ascension is coming from the Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-
llla, Ch. 10 from the Anubhasya.

In any case, with the disappearance of his two uncles, Rupa and
Sanatana Gosvamls, Jlva GosvamI became the most prominent acarya in
the Gaudlya sampradaya, and he remained prominent almost to the very
end of the 16th Century. He was the greatest scholar of his day and had


191



been intimately involved, initially as an assistant to Rupa and Sanatana
and later as the greatest theologian in the history of the Gaudlya
sampradaya, in the composition of the Vaisnava literatures which
elucidated the teachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Srlla Prabhupada
states in Caitanya-caritdmrta Adi-llla, Ch. 10, page 307, "After the
disappearance of Srlla Rupa GosvamI and Sanatana GosvamI in
Vrndavana, Srlla Jiva GosvamI became the acarya of all the Vaisnavas in
Bengal, Orissa and the rest of the world, and it is he who used to guide
them in their devotional service." He also mentions, "When Jiva
GosvamI was still present, Srlla Krsna dasa Kaviraja GosvamI compiled
his famous Caitanya-caritdmrta. Later, Srlla Jiva GosvamI inspired

Srinivasa Acarya, Narottama dasa Thakura and Duhkhl Krsnadasa

/

(Syamananda) to preach Krsna consciousness in Bengal. Jiva GosvamI
was informed that all the manuscripts that were collected from
Vrndavana and sent to Bengal for preaching purposes were plundered
near Visnupura in Bengal, but later he received information that the
books had been recovered." This section of the Caitanya-caritdmrta also
mentions Jiva Gosvaml's dealings with the exalted disciple of Srinivasa
named Ramacandra, who he gave the name Ramacandra Kaviraja, and
his touring of Vrndavana with Mother Jahnavl devl, the eternal consort
of Lord Nityananda.

/ —

In the Bhakti-ratnakara it is mentioned that Srinivasa Acarya became
the greatest preacher of that time. It was he who recovered the stolen
literatures of the Gosvamls from the king of Vishnupura, Bir Hambhir,
who was the thief of that splendid treasure. Srinivasa softened the king's
heart by his preaching and made him a disciple. After the books had
been stolen, Syamananda had left to preach in Orissa, and Narottama
had gone to Bengal. Ultimately, Srinivasa preached very widely in
Bengal and Orissa, having secured the assistance of many prominent
persons. The literatures of the Gosvamls were copied by great devotees
in Bengal and Orissa and Srinivasa Acarya held mass sanklrtana rallies
amongst the common people. This preaching and distribution of the
writings of the Gosvamls and Krsnadasa Kaviraja's Caitanya-caritdmrta
did much to unify the Vaisnava community which had heretofore not
seen the writings of the Six Gosvamls and Krsnadasa Kaviraja GosvamI.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had specifically blessed Srinivasa Acarya even


192



before his birth to be a great preacher of God consciousness. Srinivasa
often preached with Syamananda, and his most famous disciple was
Ramacandra Kaviraja, the intimate friend of Narottama. Whole
kingdoms in Bengal and Orissa became Krsna conscious by the
combined efforts of these great devotees. Narottama also preached
widely in Bengal, composed many devotional songs, and Narottama's
famous disciples named Ganganarayana and Ramakrsna and others also
preached in Manipur, which became a Vaisnava kingdom. Srlmatl
Jahnavl Devi was the prominent personality in Bengal, and She and Her
son, Vlrabhadra preached widely there. Narottama also preached in
Orissa with Syamananda. There was little party spirit amongst their
disciples and the preaching was very successful.

Narottama's father, Raja Krsnananda, was the powerful king of Kheturi
in Bengal. After his death, as well as the death of the king's brother,
Purusottama, Narottama's cousin named Santosh Datta, took up the
management of the kingdom. He took dlksa from Narottama and wanted
to build a beautiful temple for Narottama and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's pleasure. The temple was to have a large prasadam hall,
individual residences for devotees, a kirtana hall, a guest house and
flowering gardens. He wanted to have a Deity installation as grand as a
rajasuya yajha and invite all the devotees for that occasion. Invitations
went out all over India to all of the surviving associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as well as all kings, zamindars, poets, panditas and devotees.
Immense kirtana, incredible feasting and the installation were held. Six
Deities were installed. Mother Jahnavl was the principal guest of honor.
Narottama began to lead kirtana and at that time Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and all of His associates manifested, and the whole place
was a scene of indescribable ecstasy from the spiritual world. Here was
the practical exhibition of a unified, organized preaching movement
with disciples of many gurus, holding big festivals, Deity installations,
cooperative preaching activities and temple compounds laid out in the
same way that Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura and Srlla
Prabhupada later desired (i.e. guest houses, prasadam halls, etc.) In this
way, preaching went on from the disciples of Narottama dasa well into
the 17th Century.

/

One of the followers of Narottama was Sri Yuta Krsna Car ana


193



CakravartI, and his disciple was Sri Radha Ramana CakravartI, who was
the dlksa guru of Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura, who lived in the late
17th Century. He lived in the bhajana kutir of Krsnadasa Kaviraja at
Radha-kunda and wrote many wonderful books. He became the
prominent acarya after the time of Narottama and is listed next in our
disciplic succession and is considered to be directly the disciple of
Narottama dasa Thakura. His disciple was Baladeva Vidyabhusana, who
originally came in the line of Madhvacarya, but was converted to
Gaudlya Vaisnavism by Radha Damodara Deva GosvamI, a Gaudlya
Vaisnava. Baladeva Vidyabhusana became Radha Damodara Deva
Gosvaml's disciple and studied Jiva Gosvaml's Sat-sandarbha under his
direction. But later Baladeva Vidyabhusana met Visvanatha CakravartI
Thakura, the head of the Gaudlya Vaisnava community, and he became
Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura's ardent follower. Baladeva
Vidyabhusana became a babajl, established the Syamasundara Deity and
initiated disciples.

In Jaipur, during this time, members of the Ramanuja sampradaya
challenged the legitimacy of the Gaudlya sampradaya on various
grounds, including a charge that they had no proper commentary on the
Vedanta-sutra. The king of Jaipur sent the news of this challenge to
Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura, but he was by this time too old to

travel, and so he sent Baladeva Vidyabhusana. Baladeva Vidyabhusana

/

was able to successfully debate the scholars of the Srl-sampradaya, but on

the point of the commentary they wanted to see a direct one and would

/

not accept the proposal that Srlmad-Bhagavatam, the natural
commentary according to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, was sufficient.
Actually it is mentioned by Nityananda Prabhu in Bhaktivinoda
Thakura's Navadvlpa-dhama-mahatmya that Gopinatha Acarya, who
had heard Lord Caitanya instruct Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya in the
correct understanding of Vedanta, would take birth as Baladeva
Vidyabhusana to compose the Govinda-bhasya under the dictation of
Govindaji.

Govindaji appeared in a dream to Baladeva Vidyabhusana and told him
not to worry, that He would dictate the proper commentary to him. So
Govinda-bhasya was written in a short time and presented in the
assembly of the king and representatives of the Sri sampradaya in Jaipur.


194



They were dumbstruck by this exposition and offered to become
Baladeva Vidyabhusana's disciples. He refused, however out of his
sincere humility. In the pages of the Govinda-bhasya he authenticated
the Gaudlya sampradaya' s connection with the line of Madhvacarya,
coming through Laksmlpati Tlrtha, Madhavendra Purl and Isvara Puri.
Soon after this victorious presentation by Baladeva Vidyabhusana, on
behalf of Govindaji, the life and soul of Rupa GosvamI, Visvanatha
CakravartI Thakura disappeared after amply blessing Baladeva
Vidyabhusana, who then became the head of the Gaudlya sampradaya.
The Gaudlya Vedanta acarya Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana's disciple was
Srila Uddhava dasa Babaj!. His disciple was Srila Madhusudana dasa
BabajI and his disciple was Srila Jagannatha dasa BabajI, the siksa-guru
of Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, who Srila Bhaktivinoda referred to as
the Commander-in-Chief of the Vaisnavas. Srila Gaura Kisora took
babajl initiation from Srila Bhagavat dasa BabajI who was the initiated
disciple of Srila Jagannatha dasa BabajI, but Srila Gaura Kisora dasa
BabajI treated Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura as his siksa-guru.
Bhaktivinoda Thakura led the revival of the Gaudlya sampradaya in
India in the 19th Century and even attempted to spread the teachings of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu abroad by literary contributions. His efforts
were greatly expanded by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura in
the early 20th Century, who established an institution called Gaudlya
Math, which spread Krishna consciousness all over India, as well as in
Burma, and an attempt was made to introduce it in Europe as well.
Actually his preachers also preached in what is now known as Pakistan
and Bangladesh. During Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura's time
there continued to be challenges to the authenticity of our line, as it was
not strictly a dlks a- sampradaya. But Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl
Thakura in relating the history of the Visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha, the
Society of the foremost devotees established by Srila Jlva GosvamI,
explained that the sabha was sometimes manifested by the presence of a
maha-bhagavata and sometimes unmanifest in unfortunate times, but
was always present in the siksa of the mahajanas like Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, who revitalized it in the late 19th Century. This sabha then
became a revolutionary world movement in the latter 20th Century by
the heroic efforts of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


195



Prabhupada, the Founder/Acarya of the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness.

As Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura stated in his last days, "We
are nurturing a desire to dedicate this good-for-nothing body in the
sanklrtana - sacrifice of Sri Krsna Caitanya and His associates. We are
not at all desirous of any heroism in fruitive actions or religion, but our
real condition is to be the dust at the lotus feet of Sr! Rupa Prabhu birth
after birth-this is our all and all. The line of Bhaktivinoda will never be
closed. With even more enthusiasm you should be engaged in preaching
the desire of Bhaktivinoda's heart ... May the flow of thought of Sri
Rupa's followers stream all over the world. May we never, in any
condition whatsoever, show aversion to the sacrifice of chanting the
seven-tongued sanklrtana of Sri Krishna. If there is ever-increasing
attachment for this, perfection on all sides will be achieved. May all of
you, by the earnest pursuance of Sri Rupa's followers, preach the words
of Sri Rupa-Raghunatha in a fearless voice and with supreme
enthusiasm."

Therefore, the conclusion is simple. If the current of enthusiasm for
preaching the sanklrtana movement in harmony with the instructions of
the mahajanas of our line is strong, then the sampradaya is living and
substantial. The proof of life and purity will be that if the current of
enthusiastic chanting of the glories of the Lord continues, then purified
devotees full of the ecstasy of spiritual consciousness will be produced.
The tree will surely be known by its fruits.

The approximate time frames are as follows:

s

Srlla Jlva Gosvamr-late 16th Century

Srlla Krsna dasa Kaviraja Gosvaml-late 16th Century

Srlla Narottama dasa Thakura late 16th early 17th Century

s

Sri Yuta Krsna Carana CakravartI
Srlla Radha Raman CakravartI

Srlla Visvanatha CakravartI Thakura-latter 17th Century
Srlla Baladeva Vidyabhusana-latter 17th and early 18th Century
Sri Uddhava dasa BabajI

Sri Madhusudana dasa Babajr-latter 18th

/

Srlla Jagannatha dasa BabajI Maharaja-beginning of 19th Century


196



Srlla Bhaktivinoda Thakura-middle of 19th to beginning of 20th

Srlla Gaura Kishor dasa BabajI Maharaja

Srlla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatl Thakura-early 20th

Srlla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada-20th Century


197
