In Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's 1924 Vyāsa Pūjā Address, the following passage highlights a theme that arose frequently in discussions with scholars:

"We do not find God in this world. The devotees, who serve God, out of their mercy show themselves to us. We should follow their conduct and teaching. It is the only path to our well-being. Due to our meagre education and small experience, to most of us the ideas and ways of thinking of the devotees of God appear to be unedifying 'slave mentality'. Let us not indulge in such profane ravings under the urge of mental aberration. On the contrary, our line of thought should be, 'Let the censorious people calumniate us to their hearts' content. We will not mind them. Let us roll in the dust and forget everything in the ecstasy of intoxication by excessive drinking of the strong and tasty wine of the Love of Lord Hari.'"

Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's references here to "slave mentality" can be understood to be, at least in part, the reaction of the Indian intellectuals of his time, who had been bewildered by a false presentation of their own culture and religion. As the British had successfully brainwashed many intellectuals in their educational institutions by making them think that their religion was barbarous, backward, etc., the Indians sometimes took it that the ways of the Vaiṣṇavas represented something useless from their past to enslave them in the stereotype fostered by the British of foolish, illiterate "Hindoos".

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura comments on this in his book, The Bhāgavat: Its Philosophy, Its Ethics and Its Theology:

"'What sort of a thing is the Bhāgavat?' asks the European gentleman newly arrived in India. His companion tells him with a serene look, that the Bhāgavat is a book, which his Oriya bearer daily reads in the evening to a number of hearers. It contains a jargon of unintelligible and savage literature of those men who paint their noses with some sort of earth or sandal, and wear beads all over their bodies in order to procure salvation for themselves.

"Another of his companions, who has travelled a little in the interior, would immediately contradict him and say that the Bhāgavat is a Sanskrit work claimed by a sect of men, the Gosvāmīs, who give Mantras like the Popes of Italy, to the common people of Bengal, and pardon their sins on payment of gold enough to defray their social expenses. A third gentleman will repeat a third explanation. Young Bengal, chained up in English thoughts and ideas, and wholly ignorant of the pre-Mohamedan history of his own country, will add one more explanation by saying that the Bhāgavat is a book, containing an account of the life of Krishna, who was an ambitious and immoral man!

"This is all he could gather from his grandmother while yet he did not go to school! Thus the Great Bhāgavat ever remains unknown to the foreigners like the elephant of the six blind men who caught hold of the several parts of the body of the beast! But Truth is eternal and is never injured but for a while by ignorance."

[Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura herein clearly describes the situation that he, and later, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura were forced to combat in their preaching. Bengalis, in particular, and Indians, in general, had largely been made into foreigners in their own land, due to the British Sanskritists and educators, who had portrayed Vedic literature and culture as something recent, barbaric, and inferior. Prabhupāda once commented that by this tactic, the British were able to do more harm to Indian culture and religion in their short period of rule than the Mohamedans were ever able to do in their much longer one. To this day, although Indian pride in their great cultural and religious antecedents is more developed due to the efforts of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Prabhupāda and others, still the Sanskrit dictionaries, text books on Indian religion and culture, etc. reflect this cultural bias, the result of deliberate undermining work done by the British in Indological studies with the disguised intention of asserting the superiority of their own Christian-based cultural values and outlook.]

* * *

In 1929 he had a series of meetings with Professor Albert E. Suthers of Ohio State University and spoke to him on a number of topics, including Vaiṣṇavism and Christianity, transmigration, evolution, idolatry, and avatāras. Professor Suthers had come from Bombay to do research for his course in comparative religions at Ohio State University. He went to Calcutta to meet Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who was at that time in Krishnanagar.

So the professor journeyed there and heard from him for three days consecutively. The professor, as will be seen, was initially very argumentative and skeptical, but was clearly very impressed with Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's presentation, and concluded his visit with a pilgrimage to the birthsite of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Although the following exchanges are a bit lengthy, they are representative of the type of questions posed by Western intellectuals who met Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in the course of his preaching, and are entirely relevant for our preachers today, who can study the masterful presentation of Vedic culture and philosophy by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura as the pinnacle of all human thought and potential.

* * *

PROF. SUTHERS: Did the worshippers of Krishna encourage the obscenity of the engravings on many Hindu Temples?

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Those who are actual worshippers of Krishna are never in favour of indecencies. All decency and morality are entirely confined to the Lotus-Feet of Śrī Krishna. The highest sense of morality of the unadulterated soul consists in its love towards the Over-soul. And the culmination of this pure love is found only in the devotees of Krishna. The best of the moral rules as preached by the noble Jesus, do not come anywhere near the principle of Amorous Love of the devotees of Krishna for service thereof.

PROF. SUTHERS: Your Holiness seems to have taken a biased view in saying that the good moral precepts of Christ come nowhere near "the morality of amorous love of the devotees of Krishna."

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Certainly not. We claim to be greater and better Christians than Westerners. Our judgement is not restricted only to secular morality. The morality of the object of spiritual love transcends the supra-natural morality, which again surpasses secular morality. If Christian morality is perfected thereby, then it may be said to receive proper nourishment.

To a pure soul that remains situated on that transcendentally moral plane of love, the secular moralities appear reduced to the smallness of pygmies. But there is not found any feeling of apathy, nor attachment towards these secular moralities. On the other hand, all moralities wait like maids behind the spiritual moralities to become glorified, being permitted to serve the Lord of transcendental Love.

The character of a culturist of spiritual love is never devoid of morality. One hostile to morality or fallen from it can never be a spiritual man. In the blaze of the teaching of Śrī Caitanya Deva's ideal, it has been propagated that dissoluteness is not devotion. Its palpable evidence is found when we reflect on the character of Śrī Caitanya Deva or the followers at His Heel.

The people of the realm of the secular morality concerned with the worldly enjoyments and their renunciation will not be able to grasp in their tiniest brains how fostered by the climax of morality and how adored in the highest degree by all the morality of the universe are the Amorous Sports of Krishna, so much glorified by the noble clan of such high personages of strictly continent character as the devotees of Śrī Caitanya Deva like Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, etc.

PROF. SUTHERS: How can your Holiness's statements be reconciled with the descriptions that are found about Krishna's amorous sports?

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Krishna's Amorous Sports are not temporal like the lustful sports of dramatic heroes and heroines like Romeo-Juliet or even ideal spouses. Lust as prevalent in this world is only a mental passion, but the lust of the transcendental region has its own form. Here lust is always goaded by the enemy (one of the six passions); whereas in the transcendental region of Krishna, the loveliness of the spiritual Body of Krishna ever drives the Lust for Krishna, which takes form as sublimated love or the desire to gratify the immaculate senses of Krishna.

The conductor of the worldly lust is the enemy (passion), and the conductor of love is Krishna. It is the Amorous Sports of Krishna that have appropriateness; but there is no such consistency in the lust born of the body and mind of jīva (creature). Krishna's Amorous Sports are not to be called indecency, because it is Krishna Who is the only one unrivalled Enjoyer, Embodiment of the Real Truth and the Spiritual Despot.

PROF. SUTHERS: I cannot fully appreciate this; please let me understand it a little more clearly.

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Suppose there are some angles, two right angles, four right angles, etc. There is the contracted character of a corner in the acute, obtuse or right angle. But in the two right angles called the straight angle, even though called an angle, there is no contractedness or want of straightness, as in the case with angles in general.

Such is the case with the Autocrat Krishna. There is no want or contractedness or despicable character or indecency in the perfect Entity Krishna, like the circle of 360 degrees, though the communities of enjoyers or renouncers, championing morality or immorality, may, due to the meagreness of their intellect, wrongly regard the lustfulness of Krishna, the result of His despotism which is only His, as vulgar like that of common men and other creatures.

[Here we see the professor becoming a bit intimidated by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta's unexpectedly confident, mysterious, cerebral, transcendental explanation of a subject clearly beyond his ability to understand, so he changes the subject.]

* * *

PROF. SUTHERS: The Gītā has admitted the doctrine of the transmigration of the soul. What does your Vaiṣṇava philosophy say about this?

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: The Gītā is not separate from the Vaiṣṇava philosophy. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has been fully revealed the true import of the doctrine, viz., that of changes of births for the soul. Christianity has disregarded the principle of change of births on the alleged ground that if it is accepted, men will not restrain their sinful propensities, rather they will indulge in vices at their sweet will in their present life, on the expectation that they will be able to make good their sins, guilts, and wrong doing of this life in the course of the following ones.

But the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has crowned the principle with its true significance, by means of a much fuller scientific and philosophical meaning, by giving the instruction about the urgent necessity for ardently taking up and culturing devotion to God even while the human life, not easily available in the after-lives, is at our disposal, without spending a single moment thereof in other useless pursuits.

If we do not accept the doctrine of transmigration of the soul and adopt the instruction of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we shall not be able to get over the all-devouring disaster of regarding matter as the sole object of our concern, which has kept its mouth wide open.

Though most of the Christians do not admit transmigration, yet many intellectual giants of the Christian world have shown several instances of their acceptance of the doctrine. Even in the Bible we find "And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man who was blind from his birth. And his disciples asked him, saying, 'Master, who had committed the sin? This man or his parents, that he was born blind?'" [St. John 9, 1-2]

It is seen that even some Christian Fathers clearly gave instructions about transmigration. Origen said: "Is it not more in conformity with reason that every soul for certain mysterious reasons is introduced into a body and introduced according to its deserts and former actions?" [Origen contra celscea, I xxxii]

"I am sure that I, such as you see me here, have lived a thousand times, and I have to come again another thousand times" says Goethe.

What the Greeks called 'Metempsychosis' or what is 'Transmigration' in the English language, was at one time, more or less, admitted in ancient Greece, Egypt, and many places in the west. Some say that the apostles of Christ the Great, failing to reconcile their previous and subsequent conclusions with the doctrine of transmigration, were compelled to discard it. Yet no rationalist among the Christians has been able to refute the doctrine on the basis of sound reasoning; on the other hand, most of them have had to admit it even. Heredotus, Pindar, Plato, etc. have all accepted it.

Huxley, the illustrious scientist of the nineteenth century, has written in his religious work, Evolution and Ethics: "None but very hasty thinkers will reject it on the ground of inherent absurdity, like the doctrine of evolution itself, viz., that of transmigration which has its root in the world of reality, and it may claim such support as the great argument of 'analogy' is capable of supplying."

Professor Lutoloski has said, "I cannot give up my conviction of a previous existence on earth before my birth, and I have the certainty to be born again after my death, until I have assimilated all human experiences, having been many times male and female, wealthy and poor, free and enslaved, generally having experienced all conditions of human existence."

But such transmigration theories of the empiricists of the west or those of the western philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries like Franciscus Mercurius Helmont, Leichtenburg, Lessing, Herder, Schopenhauer, etc. or of Jalaluddin Rumi of the Sufi sect of Persia, or of the Theosophists, or of the Indian Nyāya philosophy under the aphorism: "From the desire for the mother's breast milk due to the habit of the previous life," or of the Buddhistic doctrine of annihilation in matter—these are assailable by various hostile reasonings and having their origin in inductive concepts are incomplete and imperfect.

But the conclusion in this respect of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is fully flawless and significant. The Vaiṣṇava philosophy having shown the royal road to the acquirement of the highest blessedness even in the present life, there is no need of waiting for future lives. As such, the Vaiṣṇava philosophy is thoroughly aloof from all wrangling full of useless riddles over the doctrine of transmigration.

[Now we will see that the professor, after prolonged exposure to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, is beginning to realize the ācārya's clear superiority on all fronts: intellectual, scholarship and spiritual realization. Still, though now more respectful, he clings to his Christian chauvinism, which is evident from the next question.]

* * *

PROF. SUTHERS: I am able to feel the super-excellence of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy among the Indian Philosophies. But to my mind, the acceptance of idolatry in the Vaiṣṇava philosophy like the other Indian philosophies seems to be a stigma in it.

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Idolatry has never been accepted in the Vaiṣṇava philosophy; on the other hand, it has been more or less accepted in the other philosophies, at least mentally, if not in so many words. In the very word 'Bhagavān' (God) have accumulated all the excellences that are there in the human and supra-human conceptions.

The existence of Majesty, viz., the furthermost limits of both vastness and minuteness, is a characteristic of God. The second characteristic is His Omnipotence. If one understands the word 'omnipotence' to mean what is conceivable by the human intellect or what is possible for man, one is wrong. God is Omnipotent, because what is impossible according to the human intellect is within the ambit of the inscrutable power of God.

Due to His inscrutable power, He is simultaneously both with and without Form. It will be the denial of His inscrutable power, if you say that He cannot have His Form, or He has not his Eternal Form, only having a Form for the time being, none in the end. By dint of his inscrutable power, He is with His Eternal Sportive Form before a liberated soul conversant with the service of His Potencies.

Contemplation only on formlessness is rather unnatural and devoid of all differential excellence. God is always All-Good, All-Glory and All-Beauty. His Beauty is visible only to the transcendental eye. God is the Transcendental Reality, Pure, Full and sentient in essence and Sentient Essence is His Form.

It is true that God has no material body, but He has His Sat (eternal), Cit (all-Sentient), Ānanda (all-Blissful), Transcendental Body visible only to the eye that is clear (devoid of matter). To the material eye, God is Formless, but to the transcendental eye He is with His Body of Cit or All-Sentience.

The Mūrtis (forms of body) prepared and worshipped by those who have not seen this Cit-Body of God with their true and eternal eye cleansed with the collyrium of the Love of God are of course idols and all the worshippers of those idols must be idolators. The worship of mūrtis of God prepared from imagination may be called idolatry.

Suppose I, who have not seen Jacob, make a mūrti of his out of imagination, this mūrti is not the replica of his form. Besides, if Jacob is a creature of this world, whose body, mind and soul are different from one another, his photograph being only the replica of his material body is different from his eternal and intrinsically true form.

But God with His Sat-cit-ānanda Body is not such a thing; His Body and Soul are not different from each other; nor are his Name and Soul, His Attribute and Figure, His Attribute and Soul, His Sport and Soul, His Sport and Figure, His Sport and Attribute, different. If a pure entity or unmixed soul sees that Eternal Form of God and receives It in his own pure receptacle and then places this Transcendental Form in the world from his heart as illuming the intrinsically and essentially true Form of God, that never deserves to be called an idol.

Just as even by coming down to this phenomenal world, God remains untouched by the influence of māyā by dint of His inscrutable power, so does His true Form, too, as revealed to the unmixed entity of His devotee, remain above it even though brought down here. For this reason the Vaiṣṇava philosophy terms Śrī-mūrti as His 'Arcāvatāra' (Worshipable Descent).

The conception of God without Form in contra-distinction to His Essential Form is as calamitous as is the falsely imagined Form of God for one competent to see His True Form. Such insignificant processes occur before attaining to the Real Entity and do only grope in the darkness. The Śrī-Vigraha of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy cannot but be the direct indication of the Essential Form of God.

By way of an imperfect comparison it may be said to be the proxy of the essential Form of God which is beyond the cognisance of the material eye, just as there are, in art and science, crude representations of invisible matter.

How can those, that have not in their heart Love of God which is the true function of the soul and is the science of the true knowledge of realities, think of the Śrī-mūrtis (Śrī-Vigrahas) as other than idols? The deliberations of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy are very fine. These have shown by true scientific analysis that they are all, more or less, idolaters who declare themselves as partisans either of the doctrine of no Form of God or that of His material Form.

Just as those who attribute God-ship to matter and worship it like the fire worshippers among the uncivilised people or the worshippers of the planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn, etc., of Greece, are crude idolaters, in a similar manner the others, who declare everything beyond matter as formless, and become exponents of the doctrine of non-distinction, are equal or even greater idolaters.

The Henotheists or worshippers of one of the Vedic deities or the worshippers of the five deities (called Pañcopāsakas) worship imaginary icons, considering them as God. According to them, God has no Sat-Cit-Ānanda-Vigraha, and as without some form there can be no subject for contemplation, to make it easy to meditate on Him, some form has got be imagined. They are all idolaters.

So also is the conduct of some of the yogīs and others to be regarded as idolatry, who, for purifying their heart or improving the functions of the mind, imagine a God and perform practices of contemplation, etc., of some imaginary form of His. Those who consider jīvas as God are the most blasphemous idolaters, because to imagine any worldly thing or form as God is idolatry.

There is a world of difference between the worship of Śrī-mūrtis as ordained by the Vaiṣṇava philosophy and the doctrines of God with Form and without Form of the other thinkers. Mahāprabhu Śrī Caitanya Deva has refuted all sorts of idolatry and instructed the service of the Arcāvatāras of the All-merciful God of Inscrutable Potency.

PROF. SUTHERS: (amazed) I have truly been astonished to hear from your Holiness these mysteries of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy and their scientific analysis with the most reasonable arguments. I could not even think before that there are in the Vaiṣṇava philosophy such excellent solution, corroboration and elucidation of the problems of Indian philosophy.

* * *

[There is one other exchange, though as usual, decidedly one-sided, when the professor in the earlier stages of the discussion foolishly tries to challenge and even decry the idea of God as a fish, boar, etc. I include Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's rather long tour-de-force on the avatāras of God, spiritual evolution of serving mood, etc. just to give some idea of the superhuman genius of an eternally liberated soul, who has, bear in mind, responded quite spontaneously to the question, obviously (to any reasonable person) from a totally realized and empowered platform.]

PROF. SUTHERS: In the scriptures of India, adorable Deities have been represented as creatures of the lower creation like fish, tortoise, boar, etc. Is this approved by the sense of decency of civilised humanity? Some again are in favour of supporting such representations as allegorical symbols.

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Imagination does not find a place in Vaiṣṇava philosophy. In it, or in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the highest scripture for all men in the universe, has been described the topmost ontology about God, millions of times better than what the most civilized races of humanity five thousand years old, nay, as old as several millions of eras, can conceive of even in imagination.

The eternal transcendental forms of God that descend or are manifested according to the gradual evolution of the aptitude for offering service by the totally purified soul quite aloof from the regions of the body and mind, when man becomes the worshipper of the ultimate Reality at the loftiest stage of civilisation, are never the idols of imagination or allegories like unreal things manufactured in the mental factory of man or like imaginary animal deities of the barbarians such as the tiger-god, serpent-god, horse-god, etc.

The worship of the Viṣṇu Incarnations like Fish, Turtle, etc., is not fabrication of imagination like that of one of the five deities of the Henotheists formed out of imagination, based on the coinage of set speeches like the imaginary conception of the forms of Brahman (as in the Pañcadaśī of the monistic school). The Henotheists do not admit the Transcendental Personality of Godhead.

The sects of figurative allegorists like the Theosophists are not real theists, cherishing, as they do, doubt against the Personality of God and as such, not having faith in realistic truth, and for that reason they want to curtail God's Omni-potentiality and His Transcendental Names, Appearances, Attributes, Sports by means of allegorical descriptions.

The Vaiṣṇava philosophy (or that of the ever-existent religion of India) has never supported the atheistic doctrines of such professors of imaginary forms of Brahman, or figurative allegorists. It is about the doctrine of pure and real Avatāra-vāda (cult of Incarnation) that the philosophy of the ever-existing Indian religion has said.

As the pure and real doctrine of Avatāras of Fish, Turtle, etc. of the Vaiṣṇavas is not a kind of imagination of the barbarian taste, nor the idolatry of the Māyāvādīs on the basis of their aphorism of forms of Brahman, imagined for the convenience of practicants, nor the allegorical descriptions of the psychists, so it is not the Anthropomorphism (i.e. representation of the deity as having human forms), as devised by the so-called civilised section of the people, nor Therianthropism (i.e. representation of one's tutelary deity in a combined man-and-beast form), nor even Apotheosis (i.e. elevating man to the dignity of deities).

These are respective types of the idolatry of the mental speculationists of the inductive school. In imitation of Māyāvāda, the evil fruit of the Indian civilisation, Anthropomorphism was invented in Greece and Rome and Therianthropism in Egypt, etc.

When the new doctrines got access in those countries along with the commodities produced by the Indian civilization which were based on the imagination of the anthrophysites like the Indian Māyāvādīs who exalted man or beasts to the status of God with the attribution of divinity to them calling jīvas and the poor as 'Nārāyaṇa' with gratification of the senses in the background, then the mental speculationists of those respective countries adopted the cheap, vitiated Indian dogmas, and, labelling new names on them, passed these doctrinal commodities into the forum of religious tenets.

But the true Vaiṣṇava philosophy of India never indulged in any such doctrine based on imagination. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has refuted all such imaginative doctrines or idolatries and rejected both Anthropomorphism and Therianthropism. He vouchsafed the Śāstric teaching, viz., that he must be a heretic and sinner who looks upon God, Nārāyaṇa, as equal to deities like Brahmā, etc.

[Here we see the perceptive Ācārya readily understanding the misconceptions accumulated by the American professor in his studies of comparative religions, thinking that the avatāras of Viṣṇu were either to be understood allegorically or as being part of a pagan Indian past. Again, this is the climate produced by the Indological researches of the British and German scholars. So Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is carefully enumerating and discounting any type of allegorical, anthropomorphic, therianthropic, etc. interpretation in relation to the avatāras of Viṣṇu. He mentions some of the bogus ideas of Western theorists: the Theosophical Society which considered the stories to be symbolic and not real, the Henotheists, who believe in one God, but who is ultimately impersonal, and he ultimately lays the blame for all these foolish conceptions at the door of the Māyāvādīs, whose philosophy he calls the "evil fruit of the Indian civilisation" who call ordinary animals and men "Nārāyaṇa" and the real background interest of its followers as "gratification of the senses". He then describes this Avatāra-vāda (cult of incarnation) as the "philosophy of the ever-existing Indian religion". This was indeed a surprise for the good professor! Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura continues:]

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: Anthropomorphism, i.e., representation of the Deity with human form and attributes, resembles the tenet of the Bāuls of Bengal attributing divinity to the head of their sect, professing, as they do, though wrongly, to have preceptorially descended from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Such tenets are the mental imaginations of atheists like the Bauddhas [followers of Buddha] and of the Bāuls as above, running contrary to the teachings of Śrī Buddha-Viṣṇu and Śrī Caitanya-Viṣṇu respectively.

The Māyāvādī sect too has adopted similar principles. The really scientific philosophy of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the preachings of Śrī Caitanya Deva have, of course, accepted the human body as the Divine Manifestation [S.B. 3.2.12]; but that human body is not the creation of anthropomorphism, nor of the Bāul doctrine, but it is the eternal Sat-cit-ānanda Body, the Cause of all causes, the highest Sportive Entity.

When the human soul can acquire the wealth of all the sciences in perfection, then only is opened the door of the foremost mystery of true science. According to the Vaiṣṇava philosophy, the Sportive Manifestation of God is of two kinds. One kind is the creation of the material and spiritual universe and its systematization with inviolable rules. The school of intelligent empiricists can to a certain extent experience this type of God's Sportive Manifestation.

The second kind is the descent of God's Transcendental Sport in this created universe. It is the jīvas who are the attendants in His Sports. They become attached to matter having deviated from their own essential nature as the result of their desire for enjoyment.

But when again the soul of jīva gains true wisdom of the transcendental region of God at the feet of a representative of His, he begins to get back his pure essential nature gradually unfolded, and God's Transcendental, Eternal Forms appear as the objects of his worship according to the comprehension of His service in the graded evolution of acceptance of His protection, self-surrender or theism.

So in such a case there remains no room, even in the slightest degree, for any form of imaginative doctrines of the so-called civilised or uncivilised human minds, whether apotheosistic, anthropomorphic, henotheistic, theriomorphic or therianthropic. The real, eternal and transcendental Divine Forms reveal themselves to the pure souls according to the nature of their serving mood in the evolutionary growth thereof. The only cause of these Divine Descents is the intense Mercy of God towards jīvas.

In Europe the theories of physical evolution of Darwin and Lamarck have been considered. But it is in the Vaiṣṇava philosophy alone that we see the fully scientific and real conception of each eternal and transcendental Divine Form for worship by the freed souls according to their evolutionary growth of serving mood.

[Here, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura shows his ready awareness of the evolutionary theories of Darwin and Lamarck, but explains that real evolution of the jīva is in the growth of his serving mood to the Lord. He now proceeds to further describe how there are ten different stages of animal life described by the sages of India, and that these may be called the "historical stages of jīvas". He then further analyzes that the ten incarnations of God indicate these different stages of jīvas in the evolution of their serving mood. In other words, the Lord appears to attract the conditioned souls to His worship by appearing in all the various stages of animate beings which the conditioned souls have experienced in their thousands of births, and He does so, being aware of the various kinds of serving moods they have developed which will cause them to be attracted to one of these forms. This will be described in his next amazing remarks.]

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: We can notice the different stages of animal life from the invertebrates to the fully grown human beings. These stages have been classified by the Indian sages of a scientific outlook in ten orders, viz. (1) the invertebrate, (2) testaceous or shelly, (3) vertebrate, (4) erectly vertebrate (as in the combined form of man and beast), (5) mannikin (dwarf), (6) barbaric, (7) civilised, (8) wise, (9) ultra-wise, (10) destructive.

These are the historical stages of jīvas. According to the gradation of these stages as indications of evolution of the serving mood of the jīva soul, there are manifested the ten Incarnations of God, viz. Matsya (fish), Kūrma (turtle), Varāha (boar), Nṛsiṁha (man-Lion), Vāmana (dwarf), Paraśurāma, Rāma, Krishna, Buddha and Kalki, as worshippable Deities with eternal transcendental Names, Forms, Attributes and Sports.

Those, who have acquired a true knowledge about Incarnations with a thorough culture thereof, will be able, with the grace of the philosophers trained in the school of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, to appreciate the ontology of Śrī Krishna, specially the intense sweetness of His Sports at Braja (i.e. Vṛndāvana and the neighbourhood).

PROF. SUTHERS: (obviously trying to grasp what he'd just heard) I have just listened to many subtle truths in the science and philosophy of religion. Please let me have a conception of these intricate matters.

[The professor had himself undergone an "evolution" from skeptical and challenging to amazed, impressed, even awed. Practically, he is inquiring at this point like a student. Now see how Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, the consummate pure preacher, seeing the professor as a conditioned soul needing to be illumined, uncompromisingly does not spare him the truth regarding the price of such illumination.]

ŚRĪLA SARASVATĪ ṬHĀKURA: The essential principle of Vaiṣṇavism is that, how-so-ever great a scholar and intellectual giant a man may be, he will not be able to appreciate even the easiest points of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy, until and unless he has entirely surrendered himself to an Ācārya whose character is the embodiment of the Vaiṣṇava philosophy.

You must have heard about the Indian scripture named Gītā, which has been translated into different languages of the civilised world. There is a śloka in it [4.34] which says that the Vaiṣṇava philosophy is understandable only with unconditional surrender, honest enquiry and serving temper. It is only to such an approach the professors of Vaiṣṇava philosophy with these three as the preceptorial fee, that they give instructions about the correct philosophical truths. These professors are never to be tempted by any type of worldly fees.

[The professor was unprepared for full surrender though, so again he changed the subject. However by the end of the interview, he was most humble and impressed and told Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, "I do not know how fortunate I am to have met your Holiness and got spiritually enlightened in this manner." He then traveled to see Lord Caitanya's birthplace, and when leaving India he spoke to many friends about the incomparability of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's contribution. These excerpts serve to underscore the wonderful scholarship, brilliance and transcendental ingenuity of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura as a preacher of the highest philosophy known to mankind. No wonder that the initially proud professor was so flabbergasted by the end of the interview.]

* * *

TOPICS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER

1. MORALITY — Is Vaiṣṇava philosophy immoral? No. Spiritual morality transcends secular morality. "Dissoluteness is not devotion." The Six Gosvāmīs were men of strictly continent character.

2. KRISHNA'S AMOROUS SPORTS — Are they lustful like worldly romance? No. Worldly lust is driven by passion (the enemy); transcendental love is driven by Krishna. He alone is the unrivalled Enjoyer — like a 360° circle with no deficiency.

3. TRANSMIGRATION — Does rebirth encourage sin? No. The Bhāgavatam crowns the doctrine with urgency: human life is rare — don't waste a moment. Even Plato, Origen, Goethe, Huxley accepted transmigration. Western theories are incomplete; Vaiṣṇava siddhānta shows the royal road to liberation in this very life.

4. IDOLATRY — Is Deity worship idol worship? No. God has an eternal Sat-cit-ānanda form visible to the transcendental eye cleansed with love. The Arcāvatāra is His worshipable descent — not imagination. True idolaters are those who declare God formless OR who imagine material forms.

5. AVATĀRAS — Are Fish, Boar, etc. barbaric symbols or allegories? No. The Daśāvatāra correspond to ten stages of serving mood evolution: invertebrate → testaceous → vertebrate → man-beast → dwarf → barbaric → civilized → wise → ultra-wise → destructive. God descends in forms to attract souls at every stage.

6. THE PRICE OF UNDERSTANDING — Can scholars grasp Vaiṣṇava philosophy by intellect alone? No. Gītā 4.34: unconditional surrender, honest enquiry, and serving temper are the only fee accepted by true teachers.
